Civil Code - CIV DIVISION 2. PROPERTY [654 - 1422] ( Heading of Division 2 amended by Stats. 1988, Ch. 160, Sec. 13. ) PART 4. ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY [1000 - 1422] ( Part 4 enacted 1872. ) TITLE 4. TRANSFER [1039 - 1231] ( Title 4 enacted 1872. ) CHAPTER 2. Transfer of Real Property [1091 - 1134] ( Chapter 2 enacted 1872. ) ARTICLE 1.5. Disclosures Upon Transfer of Residential Property [1102 - 1102.19] ( Article 1.5 added by Stats. 1985, Ch. 1574, Sec. 2. ) 1102. (a) Except as provided in Section 1102.2, this article applies to any transfer by sale, exchange, real property sales contract as defined in Section 2985, lease with an option to purchase, any other option to purchase, or ground lease coupled with improvements of any single-family residential property. (b) For purposes of this article, the definitions contained in Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 10000) of Part 1 of
				Division 4 of the Business and Professions Code shall apply. (c) Any waiver of the requirements of this article is void as against public policy. (Amended by Stats. 2019, Ch. 310, Sec. 3.   (AB 892)   Effective January 1, 2020.) 1102.1. (a) In enacting Chapter 817 of the Statutes of 1994, it was the intent of the Legislature to clarify and facilitate the use of the real estate disclosure statement, as specified in Section 1102.6. The Legislature intended the statement to be used by transferors making disclosures required under this article and by agents making disclosures required by Section 2079 on the agent’s portion of the real estate disclosure statement, in transfers subject to this article. In transfers not
				subject to this article, agents may make required disclosures in a separate writing. The Legislature did not intend to affect the existing obligations of the parties to a real estate contract, or their agents, to disclose any fact materially affecting the value and desirability of the property, including, but not limited to, the physical conditions of the property and previously received reports of physical inspections noted on the disclosure form set forth in Section 1102.6 or 1102.6a, and that nothing in this article shall be construed to change the duty of a real estate broker or salesperson pursuant to Section 2079. It is also the intent of the Legislature that the delivery of a real estate transfer disclosure statement may not be waived in an “as is” sale, as held in Loughrin v. Superior Court (1993) 15 Cal. App. 4th 1188. (b) In enacting Chapter 677 of the Statutes of 1996, it was the intent of
				the Legislature to clarify and facilitate the use of the manufactured home and mobilehome transfer disclosure statement applicable to the resale of a manufactured home or mobilehome pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 1102. The Legislature intended the statements to be used by transferors making disclosures required under this article and by agents making disclosures required by Section 2079 on the agent’s portion of the disclosure statement and as required by Section 18046 of the Health and Safety Code on the dealer’s portion of the manufactured home and mobilehome transfer disclosure statement, in transfers subject to this article. In transfers not subject to this article, agents may make required disclosures in a separate writing. The Legislature did not intend to affect the existing obligations of the parties to a real estate contract, or their agents, to disclose any fact materially affecting the value and desirability of the property, including, but not limited to, the physical conditions of the
				property and previously received reports of physical inspections noted on the disclosure form set forth in Section 1102.6 or 1102.6a or to affect the existing obligations of the parties to a manufactured home or mobilehome purchase contract, and nothing in this article shall be construed to change the duty of a real estate broker or salesperson pursuant to Section 2079 or the duty of a manufactured home or mobilehome dealer or salesperson pursuant to Section 18046 of the Health and Safety Code. It is also the intent of the Legislature that the delivery of a mobilehome transfer disclosure statement may not be waived in an “as is” sale. (c) It is the intent of the Legislature that manufactured home and mobilehome dealers and salespersons and real estate brokers and salespersons use the form provided pursuant to Section 1102.6d. It is also the intent of the Legislature for sellers of manufactured homes or
				mobilehomes who are neither manufactured home dealers or salespersons nor real estate brokers or salespersons to use the Manufactured Home/Mobilehome Transfer Disclosure Statement contained in Section 1102.6d. (d) Nothing in Assembly Bill 1289 of the 2017–18 Regular Session or Assembly Bill 2884 of the 2017–18 Regular Session shall be construed to affect any of the following: (1) A real estate broker’s duties under existing statutory or common law as an agent of a person who retains that broker to perform acts for which a license is required under this division. (2) Any fiduciary duties owed by a real estate broker to a person who retains that broker to perform acts for which a license is required under this division. (3) Any duty of disclosure or any
				other duties or obligations of a real estate broker, which arise under this division or other existing, applicable California law, including common law. (4) Any duties or obligations of a salesperson or a broker associate, which arise under this division or existing, applicable California law, including common law, and duties and obligations to the salesperson’s or broker associate’s responsible broker. (5) A responsible broker’s duty of supervision and oversight for the acts of retained salespersons or broker associates, which arise under this division or other existing, applicable California law, including common law. For purposes of this subdivision, references to “existing statutory law” and “existing, applicable California law” refer to the law as it read immediately prior to enactment of Assembly Bill 1289 of the 2017–18 Regular
				Session and Assembly Bill 2884 of the 2017–18 Regular Session. (Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 907, Sec. 8.   (AB 1289)   Effective January 1, 2019.) 1102.2. This article does not apply to the following: (a) Sales or transfers that are required to be preceded by the furnishing to a prospective buyer of a copy of a public report pursuant to Section 11018.1 of the Business and Professions Code and transfers that can be made without a public report pursuant to Section 11010.4 of the Business and Professions Code. (b) Sales or
				transfers pursuant to court order, including, but not limited to, sales ordered by a probate court in the administration of an estate, sales pursuant to a writ of execution, sales by any foreclosure sale, transfers by a trustee in bankruptcy, sales by eminent domain, and sales resulting from a decree for specific performance. (c) Sales or transfers to a mortgagee by a mortgagor or successor in interest who is in default, sales to a beneficiary of a deed of trust by a trustor or successor in interest who is in default, any foreclosure sale after default, any foreclosure sale after default in an obligation secured by a mortgage, a sale under a power of sale or any foreclosure sale under a decree of foreclosure after default in an obligation secured by a deed of trust or secured by any other instrument containing a power of sale, sales by a mortgagee or a beneficiary under a deed of trust who has acquired the real property at a sale conducted
				pursuant to a power of sale under a mortgage or deed of trust or a sale pursuant to a decree of foreclosure or has acquired the real property by a deed in lieu of foreclosure, sales to the legal owner or lienholder of a manufactured home or mobilehome by a registered owner or successor in interest who is in default, or sales by reason of any foreclosure of a security interest in a manufactured home or mobilehome. (d) Sales or transfers by a fiduciary in the course of the administration of a trust, guardianship, conservatorship, or decedent’s estate. This exemption shall not apply to a sale if the trustee is a natural person who is a trustee of a revocable trust and is a former owner of the property or was an occupant in possession of the property within the preceding year. (e) Sales or transfers from one coowner to one or more other coowners. (f) Sales or transfers made to a spouse, or to a person or persons in the line of consanguinity of one or more of the transferors. (g) Sales or transfers between spouses resulting from a judgment of dissolution of marriage or of legal separation or from a property settlement agreement incidental to that judgment. (h) Sales or transfers by the Controller in the course of administering Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 1500) of Title 10 of Part 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure. (i) Sales or transfers under Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 3691) or Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 3771) of Part 6 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. (j) Sales or transfers or exchanges to or from
				any governmental entity. (k) Sales or transfers of any portion of a property not constituting single-family residential property. (l) The sale, creation, or transfer of any lease of any duration with the exception of a lease with an option to purchase or a ground lease coupled with improvements. (m) Notwithstanding the definition of sale in Section 10018.10 of the Business and Professions Code and Section 2079.13, the terms “sale” and “transfer,” as they are used in this section, shall have their commonly understood meanings. The changes made to this section by Assembly Bill 1289 of the 2017–18 Legislative Session shall not be interpreted to change the application of the law as it read prior to January 1, 2019. (Amended by Stats. 2020, Ch. 370, Sec. 24.   (SB 1371)   Effective January 1, 2021.) 1102.3. The seller of any single-family real property subject to this article shall deliver to the prospective buyer the completed written statement required by this article, as follows: (a) In the case of a sale, as soon as practicable before transfer of title. (b) In the case of sale by a real property sales contract, as defined in Section 2985, or by a lease together with an
				option to purchase, or a ground lease coupled with improvements, as soon as practicable before execution of the contract. For the purpose of this subdivision, “execution” means the making or acceptance of an offer. (c) With respect to any sale subject to subdivision (a) or (b), the seller shall indicate compliance with this article on the real property sales contract, the lease, or any addendum attached thereto or on a separate document. If any disclosure, or any material amendment of any disclosure, required to be made by this article, is delivered after the execution of an offer to purchase, the prospective buyer shall have three days after delivery in person, five days after delivery by deposit in the mail, or five days after delivery of an electronic record in transactions where the parties have agreed to conduct the transaction by electronic means, pursuant to provisions of the Uniform Electronic
				Transactions Act (Title 2.5 (commencing with Section 1633.1) of Part 2 of Division 3), to terminate the offer by delivery of a written notice of termination to the seller or the seller’s agent. The period of time the prospective buyer has in which to terminate the offer commences when Sections I and II, and, if the seller is represented by an agent in the transaction, then also Section III, in the form described in Section 1102.6, are completed and delivered to the buyer or buyer’s agent. A real estate agent may complete their own portion of the required disclosure by providing all of the information on the agent’s inspection disclosure set forth in Section 1102.6. (Amended by Stats. 2019, Ch. 310, Sec. 5.   (AB 892)   Effective January 1, 2020.) 1102.3a. (a) The transferor of any manufactured home or mobilehome subject to this article shall deliver to the prospective transferee the written statement required by this article, as follows: (1) In the case of a sale, or a lease with an option to purchase, of a manufactured home or mobilehome, involving an agent, as defined in Section 18046 of the Health and Safety Code, as soon as practicable, but no later than the close of escrow for the purchase of the manufactured home or
				mobilehome. (2) In the case of a sale, or lease with an option to purchase, of a manufactured home or mobilehome, not involving an agent, as defined in Section 18046 of the Health and Safety Code, at the time of execution of any document by the prospective transferee with the transferor for the purchase of the manufactured home or mobilehome. (b) With respect to any transfer subject to this section, the transferor shall indicate compliance with this article either on the transfer disclosure statement, any addendum thereto, or on a separate document. (c) If any disclosure, or any material amendment of any disclosure, required to be made pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 1102, is delivered after the execution of an offer to purchase, the transferee shall have three days after delivery in person or five days after
				delivery by deposit in the mail, to terminate his or her offer by delivery of a written notice of termination to the transferor. (Added by Stats. 1999, Ch. 517, Sec. 5.   Effective January 1, 2000.) 1102.4. (a) Neither the seller nor any seller’s agent or buyer’s agent shall be liable for any error, inaccuracy, or omission of any information delivered pursuant to this article if the error, inaccuracy, or omission was not within the personal knowledge of the seller or that listing or buyer’s agent, was based on information timely provided by public agencies or by other persons providing information as specified in subdivision (c) that is required to be disclosed pursuant to this
				article, and ordinary care was exercised in obtaining and transmitting it. (b) The delivery of any information required to be disclosed by this article to a prospective buyer by a public agency or other person providing information required to be disclosed pursuant to this article shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this article and shall relieve the seller or any listing or buyer’s agent of any further duty under this article with respect to that item of information. (c) The delivery of a report or opinion prepared by a licensed engineer, land surveyor, geologist, structural pest control operator, contractor, a C-39 roofing contractor conducting a roof inspection pursuant to subdivision (d) of Section 7197 of the Business and Professions Code, or other expert, dealing with matters within the scope of the professional’s license or expertise, shall be sufficient
				compliance for application of the exemption provided by subdivision (a) if the information is provided to the prospective buyer pursuant to a request therefor, whether written or oral. In responding to such a request, an expert may indicate, in writing, an understanding that the information provided will be used in fulfilling the requirements of Section 1102.6 and, if so, shall indicate the required disclosures, or parts thereof, to which the information being furnished is applicable. Where such a statement is furnished, the expert shall not be responsible for any items of information or parts thereof, other than those expressly set forth in the statement. (Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 907, Sec. 11.   (AB 1289)   Effective January 1, 2019.) 1102.5. (a) If information disclosed in accordance with this article is subsequently rendered inaccurate as a result of any act, occurrence, or agreement subsequent to the delivery of the required disclosures, any inaccuracy resulting therefrom does not constitute a violation of this article. If at the time the disclosures are required to be made, an item of information required to be disclosed is unknown or not available to the seller, and the seller or the seller’s agent has made a reasonable effort to ascertain it, the seller may use an approximation of the information, provided the approximation is clearly identified as such, is reasonable, is based on the best information reasonably available to the seller or the seller’s agent, and is not
						used for the purpose of circumventing or evading this article. (b) The requirements of this article in effect on the date that all of the parties enter into a contract or agreement subject to this article are the requirements that shall apply to that contract or agreement. An amendment to this article that becomes effective after that date does not alter the requirements under this article that shall apply to that contract or agreement, unless the applicable statute provides otherwise. (Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 420, Sec. 9.   (AB 2960)   Effective January 1, 2023.) 1102.6. (a) The disclosures required by this article pertaining to the property proposed to be transferred are set forth in, and shall be made on a copy of, the following disclosure form: * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * NOTICE OF INCOMPLETE TEXT: The Real Estate Transfer Disclosure Statement appears in the published bill. See Sec. 25, Chapter 370 (pp. 34–38), Statutes of 2020. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * (b) The amendments to this section by the act adding this subdivision shall become operative on July 1, 2014. (Amended by Stats. 2020, Ch. 370, Sec. 25.   (SB 1371)   Effective January 1, 2021.   Note: See published chaptered bill for complete section text. The Real Estate Transfer Disclosure Statement appears on pages 34 to 38 of Ch. 370.) 1102.6a. (a) On and after July 1, 1990, any city or county may elect to require disclosures on the form set forth in subdivision (b) in addition to those disclosures required by Section 1102.6. However, this section does not affect or limit the authority of a city or county to require disclosures on a different disclosure form in connection with transactions subject to this article pursuant to an
				ordinance adopted prior to July 1, 1990. An ordinance like this adopted prior to July 1, 1990, may be amended thereafter to revise the disclosure requirements of the ordinance, in the discretion of the city council or county board of supervisors. (b) Disclosures required pursuant to this section pertaining to the property proposed to be sold, shall be set forth in, and shall be made on a copy of, the following disclosure form: * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * NOTICE OF INCOMPLETE TEXT: The Local Option Real Estate Transfer Disclosure Statement appears in the published bill. See Sec. 13, Chapter 907 (pp. 9–10), Statutes of 2018. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * (c) This section does not preclude the use of addenda to the form specified in subdivision (b) to facilitate the required disclosures. This section does not preclude a city or county from using the disclosure form specified in subdivision (b) for a purpose other than that specified in this section. (d) (1) On and after January 1, 2005, if a city or county adopts a different or additional disclosure form pursuant to this section regarding the proximity or effects of an airport, the statement in that form shall contain, at a minimum, the information in the statement “Notice of Airport in Vicinity” found in Section 11010 of the Business and Professions Code, or Section 1103.4 or 4255. (2) On and after January 1, 2006, if a city or county does not adopt a different or additional disclosure form
				pursuant to this section, then the provision of an “airport influence area” disclosure pursuant to Section 11010 of the Business and Professions Code, or Section 1103.4 or 4255, or if there is not a current airport influence map, a written disclosure of an airport within two statute miles, shall be deemed to satisfy any city or county requirements for the disclosure of airports in connection with sales of real property. (Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 907, Sec. 13.   (AB 1289)   Effective January 1, 2019.   Note: See published chaptered bill for complete section text. The Local Option Real Estate Transfer Disclosure Statement appears on pages 9 to 10 of Ch. 907.) 1102.6b. (a) This section applies to all sales of real property for which all of the following apply: (1) The sale is subject to this article. (2) The property being sold is subject to a continuing lien securing the levy of special taxes pursuant to the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act (Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 53311) of Part 1 of Division 2 of
				Title 5 of the Government Code), to a fixed lien assessment collected in installments to secure bonds issued pursuant to the Improvement Bond Act of 1915 (Division 10 (commencing with Section 8500) of the Streets and Highways Code), or to a contractual assessment program authorized pursuant to Chapter 29 (commencing with Section 5898.10) of Part 3 of Division 7 of the Streets and Highway Code. (3) A notice is not required pursuant to Section 53341.5 of the Government Code. (b) In addition to any other disclosure required pursuant to this article, the seller of any real property subject to this section shall make a good faith effort to obtain a disclosure notice concerning the special tax as provided for in Section 53340.2 of the Government Code, or a disclosure notice concerning an assessment installment as provided in Section 53754 of the Government Code, from each local agency
				that levies a special tax pursuant to the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act, or that collects assessment installments to secure bonds issued pursuant to the Improvement Bond Act of 1915 (Division 10 (commencing with Section 8500) of the Streets and Highways Code), or a disclosure notice concerning the contractual assessment as provided in Section 5898.24 of the Streets and Highways Code, on the property being sold, and shall deliver that notice or those notices to the prospective buyer, as long as the notices are made available by the local agency. (c) (1) The seller of real property subject to this section may satisfy the disclosure notice requirements in regard to the bonds issued pursuant to the Improvement Bond Act of 1915 (Division 10 (commencing with Section 8500) of the Streets and Highways Code) by delivering a disclosure notice that is substantially equivalent and obtained from another source until December 31,
				2004. (2) The seller of real property subject to this section may satisfy the disclosure notice requirements in regard to the assessments collected under the contractual assessment program authorized pursuant to Chapter 29 (commencing with Section 5898.10) of Part 3 of Division 7 of the Streets and Highway Code by delivering a disclosure notice that is substantially equivalent and obtained from another source. (3) For the purposes of this section, a substantially equivalent disclosure notice includes, but is not limited to, a copy of the most recent year’s property tax bill or an itemization of current assessment amounts applicable to the property. (d) (1) Notwithstanding subdivision (c), the seller of real property subject to this section may satisfy the disclosure notice requirements of this
				section by delivering a disclosure notice obtained from a nongovernmental source that satisfies the requirements of paragraph (2). (2) A notice provided by a private entity other than a designated office, department, or bureau of the levying entity may be modified as needed to clearly and accurately describe a special tax pursuant to the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act levied against the property or to clearly and accurately consolidate information about two or more districts that levy or are authorized to levy a special tax pursuant to the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act against the property, and shall include the name of the Mello-Roos entity levying taxes against the property, the annual tax due for the Mello-Roos entity for the current tax year, the maximum tax that may be levied against the property in any year, the percentage by which the maximum tax for the Mello-Roos entity may increase per year, and the date until the tax may
				be levied against the property for the Mello-Roos entity and a contact telephone number, if available, for further information about the Mello-Roos entity. A notice provided by a private entity other than a designated office, department, or bureau of the levying entity may be modified as needed to clearly and accurately describe special assessments and bonds pursuant to the Improvement Bond Act of 1915 levied against the property, or to clearly and accurately consolidate information about two or more districts that levy or are authorized to levy special assessments and bonds pursuant to the Improvement Bond Act of 1915 against the property, and shall include the name of the special assessments and bonds issued pursuant to the Improvement Bond Act of 1915, the current annual tax on the property for the special assessments and bonds issued pursuant to the Improvement Bond Act of 1915 and a contact telephone number, if available, for further information about the special assessments and bonds issued pursuant to
				the Improvement Bond Act of 1915. (3) This section does not change the ability to make disclosures pursuant to Section 1102.4 of the Civil Code. (e) If a disclosure received pursuant to subdivision (b), (c), or (d) has been delivered to the buyer, a seller or his or her agent is not required to provide additional information concerning, and information in the disclosure shall be deemed to satisfy the responsibility of the seller or his or her agent to inform the buyer regarding the special tax or assessment installments and the district. Notwithstanding subdivision (b), (c), or (d), nothing in this section imposes a duty to discover a special tax or assessment installments or the existence of any levying district not actually known to the agents. (Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 907, Sec. 14.   (AB 1289)   Effective January 1, 2019.) 1102.6c. (a) In addition to any other disclosure required pursuant to this article, it shall be the sole responsibility of the seller of any real property subject to this article, or his or her agent, to deliver to the prospective buyer a disclosure notice that includes both of the following: (1) A notice, in at least 12-point type or a contrasting color, as follows: “California
				property tax law requires the Assessor to revalue real property at the time the ownership of the property changes. Because of this law, you may receive one or two supplemental tax bills, depending on when your loan closes. The supplemental tax bills are not mailed to your lender. If you have arranged for your property tax payments to be paid through an impound account, the supplemental tax bills will not be paid by your lender. It is your responsibility to pay these supplemental bills directly to the tax collector. If you have any question concerning this matter, please call your local tax collector’s office.” (2) A title, in at least 14-point type or a contrasting color, that reads as follows: “Notice of Your ’Supplemental’ Property Tax Bill.” (b) The disclosure notice requirements of this section may be satisfied by delivering a
				disclosure notice pursuant to Section 1102.6b that satisfies the requirements of subdivision (a). (Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 907, Sec. 15.   (AB 1289)   Effective January 1, 2019.) 1102.6d. Except for manufactured homes and mobilehomes located in a common interest development governed by Part 5 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 4, the disclosures applicable to the resale of a manufactured home or mobilehome pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 1102 are set forth in, and shall be made on a copy of, the following disclosure form: * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
				* * * * * * * * * * * * NOTICE OF INCOMPLETE TEXT: The Manufactured Home and Mobilehome Transfer Disclosure Statement is in the hard-copy publication of the chaptered bill. See Sec. 34, Chapter 181 (pp. 29–33), Statutes of 2012. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * (Amended by Stats. 2012, Ch. 181, Sec. 34.   (AB 806)   Effective January 1, 2013.   Operative January 1, 2014, by Sec. 86 of Ch. 181.   Note: See published chaptered bill for complete section text. The Manufactured Home and Mobilehome Transfer Disclosure Statement appears on pages 29 to 33 of Ch. 181.) 1102.6e. If a property being transferred on or after January 1, 2008, is subject to a transfer fee, as defined in Section 1098, the transferor shall provide, at the same time as the transfer disclosure statement required pursuant to Section 1102.6 is provided if the document required by subdivision (b) of Section 1098.5 has not already been provided, an additional disclosure statement containing all of the following: (a) Notice
				that payment of a transfer fee is required as a result of transfer of the property. (b) The amount of the fee required for the asking price of the real property, if the amount of the fee is based on the price of the real property, and a description of how the fee is calculated. (c) Notice that the final amount of the fee may be different if the fee is based upon a percentage of the final sale price. (d) The entity to which funds from the fee will be paid. (e) The purposes for which funds from the fee will be used. (f) The date or circumstances under which the obligation to pay the transfer fee expires, if any. (Amended by Stats. 2015, Ch. 634, Sec. 3.   (AB 807)   Effective January 1, 2016.) 1102.6f. (a) On or after January 1, 2021, in addition to any other disclosure required pursuant to this article, the seller of any real property subject to this article that is located in a high or very high fire hazard severity zone, as identified by the Director of Forestry and Fire Protection pursuant to Section 51178 of the Government Code or Article 9 (commencing with Section 4201) of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 4 of the Public Resources Code, shall provide a disclosure notice
				to the buyer, if the home was constructed before January 1, 2010, that includes the following information: (1) A statement as follows: “This home is located in a high or very high fire hazard severity zone and this home was built before the implementation of the Wildfire Urban Interface building codes which help to fire harden a home. To better protect your home from wildfire, you might need to consider improvements. Information on fire hardening, including current building standards and information on minimum annual vegetation management standards to protect homes from wildfires, can be obtained on the internet website http://www.readyforwildfire.org.” (2) On or after July 1, 2025, a list of low-cost retrofits developed and listed pursuant to Section 51189 of the Government Code. The notice shall disclose which listed retrofits, if any, have been completed during the time that
				the seller has owned the property. (3) A list of the following features that may make the home vulnerable to wildfire and flying embers. The notice shall disclose which of the listed features, if any, that exist on the home of which the seller is aware: (A) Eave, soffit, and roof ventilation where the vents have openings in excess of one-eighth of an inch or are not flame and ember resistant. (B) Roof coverings made of untreated wood shingles or shakes. (C) Combustible landscaping or other materials within five feet of the home and under the footprint of any attached deck. (D) Single pane or nontempered glass windows. (E) Loose or missing bird stopping or roof flashing. (F) Rain gutters without metal or noncombustible gutter covers. (b) If, pursuant to Section 51182 of the Government Code, a seller has obtained a final inspection report described in that section, the seller shall provide to the buyer a copy of that report or information on where a copy of the report may be obtained. (c) This section shall not be construed as a requirement, instruction, or consideration for present or future building code formulation, including, but not limited to, the Wildland Urban Interface building standards (Chapter 7A (commencing with Section 701A.1) of Part 2 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations). (Amended by Stats. 2020, Ch. 370, Sec. 26.   (SB 1371)   Effective January 1, 2021.) 1102.6g. (a) After July 1, 2022, every contract for the sale of real property shall contain, in no less than 8-point type, the following notice: “Any appraisal of the property is required to be unbiased, objective, and not influenced by improper or illegal considerations, including, but not limited to, any of the following: race, color, religion (including religious dress, grooming practices, or both), gender (including, but not limited to, pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding, and related conditions, and gender identity and gender expression), sexual orientation, marital status, medical condition, military or veteran status, national origin (including language use and possession of a driver’s license issued to persons unable to provide their presence in the United
						States is authorized under federal law), source of income, ancestry, disability (mental and physical, including, but not limited to, HIV/AIDS status, cancer diagnosis, and genetic characteristics), genetic information, or age. If a buyer or seller believes that the appraisal has been influenced by any of the above factors, the seller or buyer can report this information to the lender or mortgage broker that retained the appraiser and may also file a complaint with the Bureau of Real Estate Appraisers at https://www2.brea.ca.gov/complaint/ or call (916) 552-9000 for further information on how to file a complaint.” (b) The notice described in subdivision (a) shall also be delivered by a licensed person refinancing a first lien purchase money loan secured by residential real property containing no more than four dwelling units, either prior to, or with, the loan estimate as required by the federal Truth in Lending Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. Sec.
						1601 et seq.), or the mortgage loan disclosure statement as required pursuant to Section 10240 of the Business and Professions Code. The notice described in subdivision (a) may be included as part of the disclosure required under Section 1002.14(a)(2) of the federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (Regulation B) (12 C.F.R. Sec. 1002 et seq.). (c) For purposes of this section, a “licensed person” means a depository institution chartered under federal or state law, a person covered by the licensing requirements of Division 9 (commencing with Section 22000) or Division 20 (commencing with Section 50000) of the Financial Code, or a person licensed pursuant to Part 1 (commencing with Section 10000) of Division 4 of the Business and Professions Code. (Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 352, Sec. 6.   (AB 948)   Effective January 1, 2022.) 1102.6h. (a) A seller of a single-family residential property who accepts an offer for the sale of the single-family residential property within 18 months from the date that title for the single-family residential property
						was transferred to the seller shall disclose, in addition to any other disclosure required pursuant to this article, to the buyer both of the following: (1) Any room additions, structural modifications, other alterations, or repairs made to the property since title to the property was transferred to the seller that were performed by a contractor with whom the seller entered into a contract. (2) The name of each contractor with whom the seller entered into a contract with for the room additions, structural modifications, other alterations, or repairs
						disclosed in paragraph (1) and any contact information for the contractor provided by the contractor to the seller. The obligation to provide the name of the contractor shall only apply to contracts where the aggregate contract price for labor, material, and all other items for the project or undertaking is in excess of the dollar amount specified in Section 7027.2 of the Business and Professions Code. (b) The seller’s obligation to disclose the room additions, structural modifications, other alterations, or repairs made to the property performed by a contractor may also be satisfied by providing a list of room additions, structural modifications, other alterations, or repairs performed by, and provided by, the contractor with whom the seller contracted for the room additions, structural modifications, other alterations, or repairs. (c) (1) If the seller obtained a permit for any room additions, structural modifications, other alterations, or repairs provided to the buyer pursuant to subdivision (a), the seller shall provide a copy of the permit to the buyer. (2) If the seller contracted with a third party for any room additions, structural modifications, or repairs, and the seller was not provided with a copy of any permits obtained, the seller may satisfy the obligation in paragraph (1) by informing the buyer that any information on permits may be obtained from the third party and providing the contact
						information for the third party provided by the third party to the seller. (d) This section shall apply to the sale of a single-family residential property where the seller accepts an offer from a buyer to purchase the property on or after July 1, 2024. (Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 95, Sec. 1.   (AB 968)   Effective January 1, 2024.) 1102.6i. (a) Except as provided in subdivision (b), on or after January 1, 2026, in addition to any other disclosure required pursuant to this article, the seller of any real property subject to this article, or the seller’s agent, shall deliver to the prospective buyer a disclosure statement that provides as follows: “In a purchase of real property, it may be advisable to obtain an inspection by a qualified professional of the electrical system(s) of any buildings, including, but
						not limited to, the main service panel, the subpanel(s), and wiring. Substandard, recalled, or faulty wiring may cause a fire risk and may make it difficult to obtain property insurance. Limited electrical capacity may make it difficult to support future electrical additions to the building(s), such as solar generation, electric space heating, electric water heating, or electric vehicle charging equipment.” (b) This section does not apply to the sale of a building within three years of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the building. (Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 443, Sec. 1.   (SB 382)   Effective January 1, 2025.) 1102.6j. On or after January 1, 2026, the seller of a single-family residential property subject to this article shall disclose, in writing, the existence of any state or local requirements or restrictions relating to the future replacement of existing gas-powered appliances that are being transferred with the property to the extent they or their agent are aware of those requirements or restrictions. For purposes of this section, “gas-powered appliance” includes, but is not limited to, appliances fueled by natural gas or liquid propane. (Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 443, Sec. 2.   (SB 382)   Effective January 1, 2025.) 1102.6k. (a) In addition to any other disclosure required pursuant to this article, it shall be the sole responsibility of a seller of a single-family residential property subject to this article who has actual knowledge of the existence of any residue from smoking tobacco or nicotine products, or any history of occupants smoking tobacco or nicotine products on the property, to disclose that knowledge to the buyer in writing. (b) For purposes of this section, the following apply: (1) “Residue from smoking tobacco or nicotine products” means a chemical accumulation resulting from the smoking of tobacco or nicotine products, and may be indicated by the smell of tobacco smoke or by test results that indicate elevated levels of nicotine on surfaces or in dust. (2) “Smoking tobacco or nicotine products” includes the use of an electronic cigarette or vape device for inhaling an aerosol. (Added by Stats. 2025, Ch. 263, Sec. 3.   (AB 455)   Effective January 1, 2026.) 1102.7. Each disclosure required by this article and each act which may be performed in making the disclosure, shall be made in good faith. For purposes of this article, “good faith” means honesty in fact in the conduct of the transaction. (Added by Stats. 1985, Ch. 1574, Sec. 2.   Operative January 1, 1987, by Sec. 3 of Ch. 1574.) 1102.8. The specification of items for disclosure in this article does not limit or abridge any obligation for disclosure created by any other provision of law or which may exist in order to avoid fraud, misrepresentation, or deceit in the transfer transaction. (Added by Stats. 1985, Ch. 1574, Sec. 2.   Operative January 1, 1987, by Sec. 3 of Ch. 1574.) 1102.9. Any disclosure made pursuant to this article may be amended in writing by the seller or his or her agent, but the amendment shall be subject to Section 1102.3 or 1102.3a. (Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 907, Sec. 16.   (AB 1289)   Effective January 1, 2019.) 1102.10. Delivery of disclosures required by this article shall be by personal delivery to the tranferee or by mail to the prospective transferee. For the purposes of this article, delivery to the spouse of a transferee shall be deemed delivery to the transferee, unless provided otherwise by contract. (Added by Stats. 1985, Ch. 1574, Sec. 2.   Operative January 1, 1987, by Sec. 3 of Ch. 1574.) 1102.11. Any person or entity, other than a real estate licensee licensed pursuant to Part 1 (commencing with Section 10000) of Division 4 of the Business and Professions Code, acting in the capacity of an escrow agent for the transfer of real property subject to this article shall not be deemed the agent of the transferor or transferee for purposes of the disclosure requirements of this article, unless the person or entity is empowered to so act by an express written agreement to that effect. The extent of such an agency shall be governed by the written agreement. (Added by Stats. 1985, Ch. 1574, Sec. 2.   Operative January 1, 1987, by Sec. 3 of Ch. 1574.) 1102.12. (a) If more than one licensed real estate broker is acting as an agent in a transaction subject to this article, the broker who has obtained the offer made by the transferee shall, except as otherwise provided in this article, deliver the disclosure required by this article to the transferee, unless the transferor has given other written instructions for delivery. (b) If a licensed real estate broker responsible for delivering the disclosures under this section cannot obtain the disclosure document required and does not have
				written assurance from the transferee that the disclosure has been received, the broker shall advise the transferee in writing of his or her rights to the disclosure. A licensed real estate broker responsible for delivering disclosures under this section shall maintain a record of the action taken to effect compliance in accordance with Section 10148 of the Business and Professions Code. (Amended by Stats. 1986, Ch. 460, Sec. 6.) 1102.13. No transfer subject to this article shall be invalidated solely because of the failure of any person to comply with any provision of this article. However, any person who willfully or negligently violates or fails to perform any duty prescribed by any provision of this article shall be liable in the amount of actual damages suffered by a transferee. (Added by Stats. 1985, Ch. 1574, Sec. 2.   Operative January 1, 1987, by Sec. 3 of Ch. 1574.) 1102.15. The seller of residential real property subject to this article who has actual knowledge of any former federal or state ordnance locations within the neighborhood area shall give written notice of that knowledge as soon as practicable before transfer of title. For purposes of this section, “former federal or state ordnance locations” means an area identified by an agency or instrumentality of the federal or state government as an area once used for military training purposes which may contain potentially explosive munitions. “Neighborhood area” means within one mile of
				the residential real property. The disclosure required by this section does not limit or abridge any obligation for disclosure created by any other law or that may exist in order to avoid fraud, misrepresentation, or deceit in the transfer transaction. (Added by Stats. 1989, Ch. 294, Sec. 1.) 1102.155. (a) (1) The seller of single-family residential real property subject to this article shall disclose, in writing, that Section 1101.4 requires that California single-family residences be equipped with water-conserving plumbing fixtures on or after January 1, 2017, and shall disclose whether the property includes any noncompliant plumbing fixtures as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 1101.3. (2) The seller shall affirm that this representation is that of the seller and not a representation of any agent, and that this disclosure is not intended to be part of any contract between the buyer and the seller. The seller shall further affirm that this disclosure is not a warranty of any kind by the seller or any agent representing any principal in the transaction and is not a substitute for any inspections or warranties that any principal may wish to obtain. (b) This section shall become operative on January 1, 2017. (Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 907, Sec. 18.   (AB 1289)   Effective January 1, 2019.) 1102.156. On or after January 1, 2025, in addition to any other disclosure required pursuant to this article, a seller of any real property who received domestic water storage tank assistance pursuant to Section 13194 of the Water Code, or is aware the real property received such assistance and the real property currently still has the domestic water storage tank, shall deliver to the prospective buyer a disclosure statement that includes all of the following information in substantially the following form: (a) This property has a domestic water storage tank provided by a county, community water system, local public agency, or nonprofit organization, pursuant to Section 13194 of the Water Code. (b) The
						domestic water storage tank was made available to households that had a private water well that had gone dry, or had been destroyed due to drought, wildfire, other natural disasters, or was otherwise nonfunctioning. (c) The domestic water storage tank provided pursuant to Section 13194 of the Water Code might not convey with the real property. (d) Due to the water well issues that led to this property obtaining assistance pursuant to Section 13194 of the Water Code, the buyer is advised to have an inspection of the water well and to have a professional evaluate the availability of water to the property to ensure it suits the purposes for which the buyer is purchasing the property. (Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 21, Sec. 1.   (SB 1366)   Effective January 1, 2025.) 1102.16. The disclosure of the existence of any window security bars and any safety release mechanism on those window security bars shall be made pursuant to Section 1102.6 or 1102.6a of the Civil Code. (Amended by Stats. 2004, Ch. 183, Sec. 26.   Effective January 1, 2005.) 1102.17. The seller of residential real property subject to this article who has actual knowledge that the property is adjacent to, or zoned to allow, an industrial use described in Section 731a of the Code of Civil Procedure, or affected by a nuisance created by such a use, shall give written notice of that knowledge as soon as practicable before transfer of title. (Amended by Stats. 2004, Ch. 66, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2005.) 1102.18. The provisions of subdivision (d) of Section 1102.1 shall apply to this article. (Added by Stats. 2018, Ch. 907, Sec. 19.   (AB 1289)   Effective January 1, 2019.) 1102.19. (a) On and after July 1, 2021, a seller of a real property subject to this article that is located in a high or very high fire hazard severity zone, as identified by the Director of Forestry and Fire Protection pursuant to Section 51178 of the Government Code or Article 9 (commencing with Section 4201) of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 4 of the Public Resources Code, shall provide to the buyer documentation stating that the property is in compliance with Section 4291 of the
				Public Resources Code or local vegetation management ordinances, as follows: (1) In a local jurisdiction that has enacted an ordinance requiring an owner of real property to obtain documentation that the property is in compliance with Section 4291 of the Public Resources Code or a local vegetation management ordinance, the seller shall provide the buyer with a copy of the documentation that complies with the requirements of that local ordinance and information on the local agency from which a copy of that documentation may be obtained. (2) In a local jurisdiction that has not enacted an ordinance for an owner of real property to obtain documentation that a property is in compliance with Section 4291 of the Public Resources Code or a local vegetation management ordinance, and if a state or local agency, or other government entity, or other qualified nonprofit entity, provides an
				inspection with documentation for the jurisdiction in which the property is located, the seller shall provide the buyer with the documentation obtained in the six-month period preceding the date the seller enters into a transaction to sell that real property and provide information on the local agency from which a copy of that documentation may be obtained. (b) On and after July 1, 2021, if the seller of a real property described in subdivision (a) has not obtained documentation of compliance in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2) of subdivision (a), the seller and the buyer shall enter into a written agreement pursuant to which the buyer agrees to obtain documentation of compliance with Section 4291 of the Public Resources Code or a local vegetation management ordinance as follows: (1) In a local jurisdiction that has enacted an ordinance requiring an owner or buyer to obtain
				documentation of compliance with Section 4291 of the Public Resources Code or a local vegetation management ordinance, the buyer shall comply with that ordinance. (2) In a local jurisdiction that has not enacted an ordinance requiring an owner or buyer to obtain documentation of compliance, and if a state or local agency, or other government entity, or other qualified nonprofit entity, provides an inspection with documentation for the jurisdiction in which the property is located, the buyer shall obtain documentation of compliance within one year of the date of the close of escrow. (c) Nothing in this section, including the existence of an agreement between a buyer and seller pursuant to subdivision (b), shall limit the ability of a state or local agency to enforce defensible space requirements pursuant to Section 51182 of the Government Code, Section 4291 of the Public Resources
				Code, or other applicable statutes, regulations, and local ordinances. (Amended by Stats. 2020, Ch. 36, Sec. 12.   (AB 3364)   Effective January 1, 2021.)