California Property Tax
An Overview
   PUBLICATION 29 | MARCH 2025




 BOARD MEMBERS

 TED GAINES       SALLY J. LIEBER   ANTONIO VAZQUEZ   MIKE SCHAEFER     MALIA M. COHEN     YVETTE M. STOWERS
 First District   Second District   Third District    Fourth District   State Controller   Executive Director
 Sacramento       San Francisco     Santa Monica      San Diego
 PREFACE
California Property Tax provides an overview of property tax assessment in California. It is designed to give
readers a general understanding of California’s property tax system. The publication begins with a brief history
of Proposition 13, which since 1978 has been the foundation of California’s property tax system. It then discusses
the roles of key players in property tax assessment—California voters, the Legislature, the California State Board of
Equalization (BOE), and county assessors. It explains which types of property are subject to taxation and which are
exempt. It addresses the issue of where property should be assessed. It discusses the annual process of preparing
the property tax rolls, the procedure for challenging an assessment, and the process for collecting property taxes.
Although this publication is periodically updated, the laws and rules concerning property tax assessment are
continually modified. Therefore, we caution you to consult appropriate sections of the Revenue and Taxation
Code and related codes and property tax regulations in order to have the most current information.
We welcome your suggestions for improving this publication. Please call 1-916-274-3350 or send your
suggestions to:
        County-Assessed Properties Division, MIC:64
        California State Board of Equalization
        PO Box 942879
        Sacramento, CA 94279-0064


If you need more information about California property tax, visit us at www.boe.ca.gov. Our website has the complete
text of the Assessors’ Handbook sections, special topic and assessment practices surveys, the Property Taxes Law Guide,
Property Tax Rules, Annotations, Letters To Assessors, guidelines and procedures, issue papers, and other publications.
In addition, you will find a listing of the addresses and telephone numbers for county assessors’ offices and answers to
the most frequently asked questions about property tax issues, and you can find current information on property tax
projects and Board meeting dates. The website also contains a calendar of property tax dates.



Note: This publication summarizes the law and applicable regulations in effect when the publication was written, as
noted on the cover. However, changes in the law or in regulations may have occurred since that time. If there is any
conflict between the text in this publication and the law and/or regulations, the latter are controlling.



To contact your Board Member, see www.boe.ca.gov/members/board.htm.
CONTENTS

 Chapter                                                  Page

 The Background of Property Taxes in California            1
 The Role of Voters and the Legislature                    2
 The Role of the California State Board of Equalization    2
 The Role of the County Assessor                           6
 Taxable Property                                          6
 Property Tax Exemptions                                   8
 Other Property Tax Relief Measures                        9
 Where Property is Taxed                                  11
 The Assessment Process                                   11
 The Appeal Process—Local Equalization                    12
 Tax Collection                                           14
 Glossary of Property Tax Terms                           15
 For More Information                                     17
 IMPORTANT PROPERTY TAX DATES
January 1                Lien date for all property.


February 15              Legal deadline for filing most exemption claims.
                         Last day to file a timely exemption claim for cemeteries, colleges, exhibitors, free public
                         libraries, free museums, public schools, and churches.
                         Last day to file a timely exemption claim for veterans, disabled veterans, and
                         homeowners.
                         Last day to file timely exemption claims for welfare and veterans’ organizations.


April 10                 Last day to pay second installment of secured taxes without penalty.


July 1                   Deadline for county assessor to complete local assessment roll.


July 2–September 15 or   Taxpayers file applications for reduction in assessed value with clerk of county
November 30              board of supervisors.


August 31                Last day to pay unsecured taxes without penalty.


December 10              Last day to pay first installment of secured taxes without penalty.
                         Last day to file an exemption claim for homeowners and veterans to receive 80 percent
                         of the exemption.
                         Last day to file an exemption claim for disabled veterans to receive 90 percent of the
                         exemption.
 THE BACKGROUND OF PROPERTY TAXES IN CALIFORNIA
Prior to 1912, the state derived up to 70 percent of its revenue from property taxes. The state no longer relies on
property taxes as its primary source of funds—since 1933, the only property tax directly levied, collected, and
retained by the state has been the tax on privately owned railroad cars. Currently, the state’s principal revenue
sources are personal income taxes, sales and use taxes, bank and corporation taxes, and a series of excise taxes.
Today, it is California’s counties, cities, schools, and special districts that depend on the property tax as a primary
source of revenue. The property tax raised more than $89 billion for local government during 2022-23. These funds
were allocated as follows: counties 14 percent, cities 12 percent, schools (school districts and community colleges)
53 percent, and other (such as special districts) 20 percent.

Proposition 13
On June 6, 1978, California voters overwhelmingly approved Proposition 13, a property tax limitation initiative. This
amendment to California’s Constitution was the taxpayers’ collective response to dramatic increases in property
taxes and a growing state revenue surplus of nearly $5 billion. Proposition 13 rolled back most local real property,
or real estate, assessments to 1975 market value levels, limited the property tax rate to 1 percent plus the rate
necessary to fund local voter-approved bonded indebtedness, and limited future property tax increases.
After Proposition 13, county property tax revenues dropped from $10.3 billion in 1977-78 to $5.04 billion in
1978-79. As a result, many local governments were in fiscal crisis. Keeping local governments in operation the first
two years following Proposition 13 required legislative “bailouts” to offset property tax revenue losses. A first-year
stopgap measure costing $4.17 billion in state surplus funds was necessary to directly aid local governments. A
second-year bailout, a long-term fiscal relief plan, cost the state $4.85 billion.
Prior to 1978, real property was appraised cyclically, with no more than a five-year interval between reassessments.
Since property values were systematically reviewed and updated, assessed values were usually kept at or near
current market value levels. In contrast, under Proposition 13, properties are reassessed to current market value
only upon a change in ownership or completion of new construction (called the base year value). In addition,
Proposition 13 generally limits annual increases in the base year value of real property to no more than 2 percent,
except when property changes ownership or undergoes new construction. Essentially, Proposition 13 converted
the market value-based property tax system to an acquisition value-based system.

Disparities in Assessed Value
Under Proposition 13, similar properties can have substantially different assessed values based solely on the
dates the properties were purchased. Disparities result wherever significant appreciation in property values has
occurred over time. Longtime property owners, whose assessed values generally may not be increased more than
2 percent per year, tend to have markedly lower tax liability than recent purchasers, whose assessed values tend to
approximate market levels.

Court Challenges to Proposition 13
Immediately after Proposition 13 passed, its constitutionality was challenged. The California Supreme Court upheld
the constitutionality of Proposition 13 in Amador Valley Joint Union High School District v. State Board of Equalization
on September 22, 1978. The decision rendered in this case remained the highest judicial ruling on Proposition 13
until 1992, when the United States Supreme Court ruled, in Nordlinger v. Hahn, that Proposition 13 did not violate
the equal protection clause of the United States Constitution. This ruling effectively ended speculation about
whether the judicial system would ever overturn or modify Proposition 13.




                                                                              MARCH 2025 | CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX        1
    THE ROLE OF VOTERS AND THE LEGISLATURE
Together, the electorate and the Legislature of California have reshaped the administration of property taxes since
1978. Constitutional amendments, both voter-initiated (initiative constitutional amendments) and Legislature-
initiated (Assembly or Senate constitutional amendments), have established fundamental changes. Meanwhile,
legislative measures have interpreted, clarified, and implemented the constitutional provisions.



    THE ROLE OF THE CALIFORNIA STATE BOARD OF EQUALIZATION
The BOE was established in 1879 by constitutional amendment. The BOE consists of five elected members: four
members are elected from legislatively defined districts, while the fifth member, the State Controller, is elected
at-large and serves in an ex officio capacity. The BOE’s original purpose was to regulate county assessment practices,
equalize county assessment ratios, and assess properties of railroads. Over the years, the legislature expanded the
Board’s duties to include many tax and fee programs. In 2017, the Taxpayer Transparency and Fairness Act (AB102),
restructured the BOE into three separate agencies. Statutory duties performed by the BOE were transferred to the
California Department of Tax and Fee Administration and the Office of Tax Appeals.
The BOE continues to perform the duties it was assigned by the state constitution, including the administration of
most property tax programs.

The Need for Uniform Assessments
While the county assessor determines the value of locally assessable property for taxation purposes, the BOE has
a vested interest in the valuation by virtue of its constitutional responsibility to promote uniformity in property
assessments throughout the state. Uniformity is important both within and among counties for a number of reasons:
    • Cost-sharing provisions for funding public schools require the state to make up the difference between
      statutory revenue guarantees and property tax proceeds. Underassessments increase a required state subsidy
      from the general fund.
    • Assessments at more or less than full taxable value result in a misallocation of revenues.

Divisions of the BOE’s Property Tax Department
The BOE’s property tax functions are administered by the Property Tax Department, which has three divisions:
Assessment Practices Survey Division, County-Assessed Properties Division, and State-Assessed Properties
Division. Each division’s role in the administration of property tax is described on the following pages.

Assessment Practices Survey Division
The Assessment Practices Survey Division is responsible for measuring statewide compliance and uniformity in
county assessment procedures and practices. This is achieved through the following activities.
Assessment Practices Surveys
The Government Code requires the BOE to periodically review the practices and procedures (surveys) of specified
county assessors’ offices. The purpose of the survey is to determine the adequacy of the procedures and practices
the county assessor uses in valuing property and to evaluate the assessor’s performance of mandated duties. The
survey concentrates on statutory mandates and revenue-related issues.
The surveys are conducted as follows: For each county, BOE staff conducts an audit of the assessor’s procedures and
practices. The staff then publishes an assessment practices survey report that summarizes the findings and includes
recommendations for improvement.



2       CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX | MARCH 2025
Sampling of Assessments
The BOE conducts a sampling of assessments on a five-year cycle for the ten largest counties and cities and
counties, and on either a random or as needed basis for the remaining counties. The purpose is to review a
representative sampling of the assessments making up the local assessment rolls, both secured and unsecured, to
determine how effectively the county assessor is identifying those properties subject to revaluation and how well
the county assessor is performing the valuation function.
In each case, a statistically representative sample is drawn from the county assessment roll. BOE staff audits and
appraises each property in the sample and compares the results to the county assessor’s values. Staff then expands
the results to determine whether the total assessment roll complies with statutory standards. The expanded results
are summarized and are either published in an assessment sampling report or they are incorporated into the
published assessment practices survey report.
Special Topic Surveys
The BOE periodically publishes “special topic” surveys on statewide assessment practices. The surveys focus on
specific subject areas or major issues that have significant impact on local property taxation. These surveys are
conducted when needed. To date, surveys have been conducted on Land Conservation Act (Williamson Act)
properties, new construction, changes in ownership, mobilehomes, possessory interests, assessment appeals, audit
procedures, confidentiality of assessors’ records, depreciation factors, coordination on tenant improvements, and
section 11 and PERS properties.

County-Assessed Properties Division
The County-Assessed Properties Division is responsible for establishing policies and standards for proper
assessment practices statewide. These goals are achieved through the following activities.
Property Tax Rules
The Board is required to prescribe rules and regulations to govern assessors and local boards of equalization. The
BOE’s property tax rules are codified in Title 18 of the California Code of Regulations. These rules are adopted to
clarify statutes relating to assessment principles and procedures.
Assessors’ Handbook
The Assessors’ Handbook comprises more than 25 instructional manuals on various assessment and appraisal topics,
including annually revised building cost estimating guidelines. Individual manuals are periodically updated to
reflect legislative changes and revisions in appraisal and assessment systems.
Property Tax Exemptions
The BOE prevents multiple claims for the Homeowners’ Exemption and the Disabled Veterans’ Exemption, by acting
as a statewide clearinghouse. The BOE also has a dual role with county assessors in administering the Welfare
Exemption, which exempts property used exclusively for religious, hospital, scientific, or charitable purposes and
owned and operated for those purposes by qualifying nonprofit organizations. The BOE determines whether an
organization is eligible for the Welfare or Veterans’ Organization Exemption. The BOE also advises assessors and
prescribes forms for the administration of all other property tax exemptions.
Appraiser and Assessment Analyst Training and Certification
County assessors and the property appraisers they employ must meet certain minimum qualifications and hold
an appraiser’s certificate issued by the BOE which is attained by successfully passing a certification examination. In
order to retain an appraiser’s certificate, appraisers must complete a specified number of hours of training per year.
The BOE provides training at various sites throughout California and monitors the yearly training requirements. The
BOE conducts classes on various appraisal topics.




                                                                            MARCH 2025 | CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX      3
A county board of supervisors may pass a resolution that imposes certification and annual training requirements
on county assessor employees responsible for property tax change in ownership and exemption decisions. An
assessment analyst certificate issued by the BOE is attained by successfully passing a certification examination. In
order to retain an assessment analyst certificate, assessment analysts must complete a specified number of hours of
training per year.
In addition, the BOE provides workshops, online sessions, and webinars on specific assessment issues to enhance
the knowledge and skills of county assessors, appraisers, assessment analysts, Board Members and their staff, and
appeals board members.
Letters To Assessors
Letters To Assessors are advisory letters issued to all county assessors and interested parties. Typically, the letters
provide staff interpretations of rules, laws, and court decisions, or general information relating to property tax
assessment. A no-cost email subscription service for Letters To Assessors is available at
www.boe.ca.gov/proptaxes/letters/index.htm.
Assessment Services
The BOE also responds to individual inquiries from county assessors, legislators, taxpayers, and the business
community, as well as to letters written to the Governor on property tax issues. To contact the BOE via email with
property tax questions, email PT-WebRequests@boe.ca.gov.
Legal Entity Ownership Program
This program is a cooperative effort between the BOE and the Franchise Tax Board to discover both changes in
ownership and change in control of legal entities. When the BOE determines that an entity that owns real property
in California has undergone a change in control or ownership, the BOE informs the appropriate county assessors of
the need to reappraise real property owned by those entities.
Clearinghouse Programs
The BOE monitors claims for relief under Propositions 58 (parent-child transfers) and 193 (grandparent-grandchild
exclusion), Propositions 60 and 90 (persons over 55) and 110 (disabled persons), Proposition 19 (base year value
transfer for persons over 55 or disabled), and Proposition 3 (eminent domain properties).
Forms
The BOE prescribes many types of forms for use by county assessors, such as business property statements,
exemption claim forms, and change in ownership forms. County assessors may make limited revisions to the forms
to meet their processing needs, but they must submit such revised forms for BOE staff review and approval.

State-Assessed Properties Division
The State-Assessed Properties Division is responsible for administering the assessment program of California
state assessees under the BOE’s jurisdiction.
State Assessees
The California Constitution requires the BOE to annually assess property (except franchises) owned or used by
regulated railway, telegraph, or telephone companies, car companies operating on railways in the state, and
companies transmitting or selling gas or electricity. It also requires the BOE to annually assess pipelines, flumes,
canals, ditches, and aqueducts lying within two or more counties. Except for the railway car companies (see Private
Railroad Car Tax below), the assessed values are allocated to the counties and other local tax jurisdictions in which
the property is located. The taxes are levied and collected in the same manner as they are for county-assessed
properties. State-assessed property is not subject to the provisions of Proposition 13 and is assessed at its
fair market value, or its full value, as of 12:01 a.m. each January 1.




4      CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX | MARCH 2025
Private Railroad Car Tax
The BOE performs the entire assessment function, including appraisal and tax collection, for privately owned
railroad cars.
Tax-Rate Mapping Program
A tax-rate area number is assigned to each geographical area in the state with a different distribution of revenues
among taxing jurisdictions. The BOE maintains this program in order to allocate the value of certain state-assessed
properties to their appropriate taxing jurisdictions. County auditors also use these tax-rate areas to allocate
property tax revenues to the appropriate taxing jurisdictions.

Taxpayers’ Rights Advocate Office
The Taxpayers’ Rights Advocate, appointed by the BOE Executive Director, is responsible for implementing the
Morgan Property Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights. The Advocate facilitates resolution of taxpayer complaints and problems
in the assessment and collection of property taxes, and monitors programs administered by the BOE and by county
assessors for compliance with the Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights. The Advocate is also charged with identifying areas of
recurring conflict between taxpayers and property tax assessment officials.
The Advocate has an educational role in providing education and instruction to local taxpayers to promote
taxpayer understanding of property tax law under section 5908 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; it does so
by issuing Information Sheets on various topics to help taxpayers. The Advocate issues a formal annual report
highlighting the accomplishments of the Taxpayers’ Rights Advocate Office, providing examples of cases
illustrating the services its office provides to assist taxpayers, identifying issues that its office worked on to resolve,
and its work on educational projects to help taxpayers. The BOE holds an annual public hearing to address the
report and give taxpayers, industry representatives and other stakeholders the opportunity to present ideas and
concerns on property taxes and the alcoholic beverage tax.
In addition, the Property Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights provides measures designed to promote the fair administration of
the property tax. For example, section 5909 of the Revenue and Taxation Code provides for relief of penalties and
interest in some situations where a taxpayer relies on written rulings from the county assessor.
        Taxpayers’ Rights Advocate Office
        California State Board of Equalization
        PO Box 942879
        Sacramento, CA 94279-0120
        Telephone: 1-916-274-3400
        www.boe.ca.gov/tra




                                                                                 MARCH 2025 | CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX         5
     THE ROLE OF THE COUNTY ASSESSOR
The county assessor, an elected official, is governed by the California Constitution, the laws passed by the
Legislature, and the rules adopted by the BOE. An individual county government does not control the county
assessor’s tasks.1

Annual Assessments
The county assessor must annually assess all taxable property in the county, except for state-assessed property,
to the person, business, or legal entity owning, claiming, possessing, or controlling the property on January 1. The
duties of the county assessor are to discover all assessable property, to inventory and list all taxable property, to
value the property, and to enroll the property on the local assessment roll.
The assessor’s primary responsibility is to annually determine the proper taxable value for each property so the
owner is assured of paying the correct amount of property tax for the support of local government.

Local Property Tax Roll
The assessed value determined and enrolled by the county assessor is multiplied by the appropriate tax rate to
form the basis of the current year’s tax bill. The tax rate is 1 percent plus (1) the amount necessary to make annual
payments due on general obligation bonds or other indebtedness incurred prior to July 1, 1978; (2) any bonded
indebtedness for the acquisition or improvement of real property approved by a two-thirds majority of voters on
or after July 1, 1978; and (3) certain bonded indebtedness for school facilities approved by 55 percent of the voters.
The collection of these taxes and their allocation to the appropriate taxing jurisdictions are functions of the county
tax collector and the county auditor, respectively. Like the county assessor, these officials are governed by state law.



     TAXABLE PROPERTY
Unless the California Constitution or federal law specifies otherwise, all property is taxable. Property is defined as all
matters and things—real, personal, and mixed—that a private party can own.
Real Property
Real property is defined as:
     • The possession of, claim to, ownership of, or right to the possession of land.
     • All mines, minerals, and quarries in the land, all standing timber whether or not belonging to the owner of the
       land, and all pertinent rights and privileges.
     • Improvements—defined as all buildings, structures, fixtures, and fences erected on or affixed to the land, and
       all fruit, nut bearing, or ornamental trees and vines, not growing naturally, and not exempt from taxation,
       except date palms under eight years old.

Personal Property
Personal property is defined as all property except real property. Personal property is either tangible or intangible.
Generally, all tangible personal property is taxable except where specific exemptions are provided. Tangible
personal property is any property, except land or improvements, that may be seen, weighed, measured, felt, or
touched, or which is in any other manner perceptible to the senses.

1
    See the BOE’s website for a listing of county assessors.




6           CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX | MARCH 2025
Examples of taxable tangible personal property include portable machinery and equipment, office furniture,
tools, and supplies. Examples of nontaxable tangible personal property are household goods and personal
effects, noncommercial boats worth $400 or less, and goods held for sale or lease in the ordinary course of
business (inventories).
Examples of nontaxable intangible property include notes, corporate securities, shares of capital stock, solvent
credits, bonds, deeds of trust, mortgages, liquor licenses, insurance policies, club memberships, and copyrights.
The classification of property as either real property or personal property is significant because the tax assessment
procedures vary depending on the type of property:
  • The Legislature may exempt personal property from taxation or provide for differential taxation. The Legislature
    does not have this power over real property.
  • Personal property is not subject to Proposition 13 value limitations.
  • Generally, special assessments are not applicable to personal property.

Possessory Interests
Private interests in publicly owned lands, known as possessory interests, are also taxable. Examples of taxable
possessory interests include permitted use of U.S. Forest Service property such as ski resorts, stores, and cabins;
harbor leases; boat slips at public marinas; tie-downs at public airports; grazing land permits; employee housing on
tax-exempt land; and mineral rights in public lands.
A possessory interest in real property exists as a result of possession, exclusive use, or a right to possession or
exclusive use of land and/or improvements without either outright ownership of the land or a life estate in the
property. A possessory interest becomes taxable when the interest is held in nontaxable publicly owned real
property. There is no possessory interest assessment on the use of publicly owned personal property.

Properties Owned by Local Governments Outside Their Boundaries
Properties that are owned by local governments but located outside their boundaries are taxable under article
XIII, section 11, and article XIII A of the California Constitution if the property was taxable when it was acquired by
the local government. Each year, the lowest of the following three values is enrolled: the current market value, the
factored base year value, or the value determined under a special formula prescribed in section 11.

Property Not Covered by Proposition 13
Proposition 13 did not affect the assessment of all property. Properties not affected by Proposition 13 fall into two
general categories:
  • Personal property.
  • Utilities, railroads, and other properties assessed by the BOE.




                                                                              MARCH 2025 | CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX        7
    PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
The State Constitution provides for a variety of full and partial exemptions. The Legislature has unlimited authority
to provide for exemption of any kind of personal property, but it cannot exempt real property without specific
authority provided by the Constitution.
Following is a brief discussion of some of the major property tax exemptions in California. Please note that
issues regarding many of these exemptions are complex; the assessor’s office should be consulted for detailed
requirements regarding exemptions.

Personal Effects
Household furniture, hobby equipment, and other personal effects are exempt. This exemption does not include
vehicles, aircraft, or boats with a value over $400. It also does not include any property used for a trade or business.
No filing is required.

Intangible Personal Property
All forms of intangible personal property are exempt. Examples of intangible personal property include cash, bank
accounts, mortgages, and stock certificates. No filing is required.

Homeowners’ Exemption
The Constitution requires a $7,000 reduction of taxable value for qualifying owner-occupied homes when the homes
are the owners’ principal place of residence. Rentals and vacation homes do not qualify. The state reimburses local
agencies for the loss in property tax revenue. The homeowner must make a simple one-time filing with the county
assessor for the exemption.

Business Inventory
Personal property held for sale or lease in the ordinary course of business is exempt. “Business inventory” includes
merchandise held for sale or lease, animals used in the production of food or fiber, and incidental supplies passed
on to the customer. The exemption does not include property in use on the lien date (except animals) or ordinary
supplies. No filing is required, but the assessor may audit the taxpayer to verify whether the property qualifies.

Low-Value Property Tax Exemption
A county board of supervisors is authorized to exempt from property taxes real property with a base year value and
personal property with a full value so low that, if not exempt, the total taxes, special assessments, and applicable
subventions on the property would amount to less than the cost of assessing and collecting them. The value
threshold is $10,000 or less. However, the value threshold is increased to $50,000 for possessory interests that are
for a temporary and transitory use in a publicly owned convention center, cultural facility, or fairground.

Church Exemption
Land, buildings, and personal property used exclusively for religious worship are exempt. The exemption does not
include excess property or property used for purposes other than religious worship. This exemption requires an
annual filing.

Welfare Exemption
The welfare exemption includes property owned, irrevocably dedicated to, and used for religious, hospital,
scientific, and/or charitable purposes. The BOE makes a one-time determination regarding whether an organization
is eligible for the exemption. Each year, the county assessor determines whether the property is being used for
exempt purposes.


8      CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX | MARCH 2025
Disabled Veterans’ Exemption
Current law provides a basic exemption of $100,000 on the principal place of residence for veterans with specified
disabilities or for unmarried surviving spouses of deceased disabled veterans. A one-time filing is required. This
exemption may be raised to $150,000 if the applicant meets the income limit of $40,000. Annual filing is required
for the $150,000 exemption. The income limit and both the exemption amounts are adjusted annually for inflation.

Crops, Trees, and Vines
Growing crops are exempt. No filing is required. Grapevines are exempt for the first three years and orchard trees
for the first four years after the season in which they are planted. Date palms under eight years of age are exempt.

Other Examples of Exempt Properties
Listed below are some other types of properties that are fully or partially exempt. Some of the exemptions require
filing, and there are restrictions on the use of the properties in some cases.
        Aerospace museum personality               Historical aircraft
        Livestock (most)                           Burial plots
        Nonprofit colleges and schools             Large vessels and low-value boats
        Free libraries and museums                 Art gallery displays



 OTHER PROPERTY TAX RELIEF MEASURES
The State Constitution provides for a variety of tax relief measures that the Legislature has implemented as
California property tax relief programs. The issues and qualifications regarding these programs are complex, and
claim forms must be filed to obtain the relief. The county assessor’s office should be contacted for claim forms and
detailed requirements regarding these programs.

New Construction Exclusion for Disabled Access
New construction may be excluded from reassessment if it consists of modifying an existing structure to make the
structure more accessible to a physically disabled person. Claims for this exclusion must be filed with the county
assessor.

Disaster Relief
The taxable value of properties that have been substantially damaged or destroyed by a disaster may be reassessed
to reflect the damage, under the county’s disaster relief ordinance. Claims for this relief must be filed with the
county assessor within the time period specified in the ordinance or within one year from the date the property
was damaged or destroyed by the disaster, whichever is later. The reduced value remains until the property is fully
repaired, restored, or reconstructed. Then the factored base year value will be restored as long as it is substantially
equivalent to the property prior to the damage or destruction.
If the disaster occurs in an area proclaimed by the Governor to be in a state of emergency and the taxpayer chooses
not to repair, restore, or reconstruct the damaged property, the taxpayer may seek to transfer their base year value
under one of the following programs:




                                                                             MARCH 2025 | CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX      9
     • The taxable value of property substantially damaged or destroyed may be transferred to comparable
       replacement property that is located within the same county and acquired or newly constructed within five
       years (eight years for Camp Fire) after the disaster. Claims for this exclusion are filed with the county assessor.
       (Revenue and Taxation Code 69)
     • The taxable value of a principal residence substantially damaged or destroyed may be transferred to a qualified
       replacement residence located within another county, provided that the replacement residence is purchased or
       newly constructed within three years after the disaster and located in a county that has adopted an ordinance that
       allows such taxable value transfers. This is effective for disasters occurring on or after October 20, 1991. Contra
       Costa, Glenn, Los Angeles, Modoc, Orange, San Diego, San Francisco, Santa Clara, Solano, Sonoma, Sutter, Ventura,
       Yolo, and Yuba Counties have adopted ordinances accepting transfers of base year value under this program.
       Claims for this exclusion must be timely filed with the county assessor. (Revenue and Taxation Code 69.3)
     • The taxable value of a principal residence substantially damaged or destroyed by wildfire or natural disaster may
       be transferred to a replacement residence located anywhere in California provided the replacement residence is
       purchased or newly constructed within two years of the sale of the damaged or destroyed principal residence.
       Claims for this exclusion must be timely filed with the county assessor. (Revenue and Taxation Code 69.6)

Eminent Domain
The taxable value of property may be transferred to a comparable replacement property if the person acquiring the
real property has been displaced from property by eminent domain proceedings, by acquisition by a public entity,
or by governmental action that resulted in a judgment of inverse condemnation. The replacement property does
not have to be located in the same county as the taken property. Claims for this exclusion must be filed with the
county assessor within four years of displacement.

Over 55 and Disabled Citizens Relief
People over the age of 55 or who are severely and permanently disabled may transfer the taxable value of their
principal residence to a replacement residence if it is purchased or newly constructed within two years of the sale
of the original property. While the replacement home may be of any value, if the full cash value of the replacement
home exceeds the full cash value of the original property, the difference in values will be added to the transferred
base year value. A person may utilize this tax relief program three times.
Claims must be filed with the county assessor within three years of the purchase or completion of construction of
the replacement residence.

Parent-Child and Grandparent-Grandchild Exclusions
The purchase or transfer of a family home or family farm between parents and children is not subject to
reassessment if certain qualifications are met and claims are filed. A key requirement for a family home is that the
family home continues as the principal residence of the transferee. This exclusion also applies to transfers between
grandparents and grandchildren when both qualifying parents are deceased, subject to certain limitations.
Additionally, the transfer of each family home or legal parcel of a family farm is subject to a value cap, which is the
sum of the property’s factored base year value plus $1 million. The $1 million amount is subject to adjustment on
February 16, 2023, and every other February 16 thereafter. Claims for this exclusion must be filed with the county
assessor within certain time limits.

Solar New Construction Exclusion
The construction or addition of any active solar energy system is excluded from new construction and is not subject
to property taxation until the property changes ownership. A qualifying solar energy system does not include solar
swimming pool heaters or hot tub heaters. This exclusion is scheduled to sunset on January 1, 2027.



10        CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX | MARCH 2025
 WHERE PROPERTY IS TAXED

Real Property
Real property, interests in real property, and taxable possessory interests are taxable in the county where they are
located, regardless of where the owner lives. If a parcel of real property spans more than one revenue district, the
portion lying within each district is taxable in that district.

Personal Property
Tangible personal property is taxable where it has established “permanent situs” (location), regardless of where
the owner lives. The only exception is personal property belonging to members of the armed services who are
on active service in California and who have permanent residence outside of California. Some types of personal
property do not have a fixed location and are movable, for example, copy machines. As a result, determining
permanent situs depends on a number of factors including the type of property, the way the property is typically
used, and where the property owner lives.

Aircraft and Vessels
Private aircraft are taxed at the location of the airport or hangar where they are usually kept. Commercial
certificated aircraft are taxed on an apportioned basis in each county to which flights are made. Vessels in excess
of $400 in value are generally assessed where they are habitually located. A small boat not habitually kept at a
mooring, but lifted from the water and trailered to the owner’s residence or other location, is taxed at the location
where it is usually kept.



 THE ASSESSMENT PROCESS

Annual Assessments
Annually, whoever owns taxable property on January 1 (the lien date) becomes liable for a tax calculated at
1 percent of the “taxable” value of the property. Article XIII A of the California Constitution (Proposition 13) also
permits adding to the 1 percent tax rate a rate needed to pay interest and redemption charges for voter-approved
indebtedness. Such additional rates can vary from area to area within a county.

Change in Ownership and New Construction
The assessed value for most property taxed under Article XIII A is the prior year’s assessed value adjusted for
inflation up to 2 percent. However, if there has been a change in ownership or completed new construction, the
new assessed value will be the market value of the property as of the date that it changed ownership or was newly
constructed. That property will also be assessed on the supplemental roll.

Supplemental Assessments
The supplemental roll provides a mechanism for placing reappraisals under Article XIII A into immediate effect,
rather than waiting for the next January 1 lien date. A prorated assessment (the supplemental assessment) reflects
the increase or decrease in assessed value that results from the reappraisal. It covers the portion of the fiscal year
that remains after the date of change in ownership or completed new construction. The supplemental assessment
statutes apply to any property subject to Article XIII A that has undergone a change in ownership or completed new
construction.




                                                                            MARCH 2025 | CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX        11
For changes in ownership or completed new construction occurring between January 1 and May 31, two
supplemental assessments are issued. The first covers the portion of the current fiscal year remaining after the date
of the event; the second covers the entire next fiscal year. An increase in assessment will result in a supplemental
tax bill. A decrease in assessment will result in a refund.
Supplemental assessments do not affect exemptions for which the assessee is otherwise eligible. If granted, the
exemption is applied to the amount of the supplemental assessment.



 THE APPEAL PROCESS—LOCAL EQUALIZATION
The assessor must reassess real property to current market value whenever there is a change in ownership or
completed new construction. In addition, the assessor may change the assessed value of a property to recognize
a decrease in value, to correct an error, or to enroll an escaped assessment (one overlooked previously). Except for
changes in assessment due to annual adjustments for inflation, assessors must notify property owners whenever
their assessments of real property are increased. The notifications are sent on or before the date the assessment
roll is completed, generally July 1. Personal property is reassessed annually. Notification of personal property
assessments is not required.

Appeal Rights
Property owners can appeal the value of the property appearing on the regular assessment roll by filing an
Assessment Appeal Application for changed assessment during the regular assessment filing period with the
clerk of the board of supervisors (sitting as a local board of equalization) or assessment appeals board. The
regular assessment filing period is July 2 through either September 15 or November 30, depending on whether
the assessor has elected to mail assessment notices to all taxpayers on the secured roll. A listing of assessment
appeal filing deadlines by county is posted on the BOE website at www.boe.ca.gov/proptaxes/pdf/filingperiods.pdf.
Assessments made outside the regular assessment period (supplemental assessments and escape assessments)
must be appealed within 60 days after the date the notice of change in assessment is mailed. An exception exists in
Los Angeles County and in any other county where the board of supervisors has adopted an alternative resolution.
In these counties, such assessments may be appealed within 60 days of the date of mailing printed on the tax bill or
the postmark date, whichever is later. For disaster relief assessment appeals, a claim must be filed within six months
of the reassessment notice.
Homeowners desiring a more complete guide to the appeal process may obtain a copy of the BOE’s
publication 30, Residential Property Assessment Appeals. This guide may also be found on the BOE website at
www.boe.ca.gov/proptaxes/asmappeal.htm.

Informal Discussion with Assessor
Often, a taxpayer’s first step in challenging an assessment is simply to discuss the matter informally with the
assessor’s staff. The taxpayer should request an explanation of how the assessment was determined and inform the
assessor of any facts that may affect the value of the property.




12     CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX | MARCH 2025
Administrative Hearing
The first formal level of appeal is to the board of supervisors, sitting as a county board of equalization, or to the
assessment appeals board if the county has created one. Taxpayers may obtain an Assessment Appeal Application
from the clerk of the board. Many counties have the Assessment Appeal Application posted on their county website.
Some counties use hearing officers for certain appeals.
The hearing before the board is an administrative hearing. The property owner can choose to be represented by a
lawyer or a tax agent, but this representation is optional. As a general rule, the property owner has the burden of
proving that the assessor has improperly valued the property. However, when the property is an owner-occupied,
single-family dwelling which is the principle residence of the taxpayer, the burden falls on the assessor to prove
that the property was valued correctly.
If the taxpayer wants a written explanation of the board’s or hearing officer’s decision, the taxpayer should request
a “Findings of Fact” before the beginning of the hearing. Findings and a transcript are necessary when a taxpayer
seeks judicial review of an adverse decision.
Further information on the actual hearing process may be found in the BOE’s Assessment Appeals Manual.
This manual provides information and instruction to local boards on assessment appeals practices and
procedures. The BOE has also created a video that explains and describes the appeals process. The manual,
video, and other information regarding assessment appeals may be found on the BOE website at
www.boe.ca.gov/proptaxes/asmappeal.htm.

Court Appeal
If the county board denies the appeal, the taxpayer may file an action in superior court, but only under certain
circumstances. Generally, the court will hear a case only for the following reasons: arbitrariness, lack of due process,
abuse of discretion, failure to follow standards prescribed by law (for example, using an erroneous method of
valuation), or other questions of law. The court will not receive new evidence of value; it will only review the
record of the hearing before the county board. If it finds that the county board’s decision is supported by credible
evidence, it will uphold the board’s decision.
Taxpayers must exhaust their administrative remedies before seeking relief in court. This includes filing an
Assessment Appeal Application for changed assessment with the appeals board and a claim for refund of taxes with
the appropriate county official(s). An action against a county must be filed in superior court within six months after
the county denies the claim for refund. However, if the county fails to act on the claim for refund for more than six
months, the taxpayer may consider the claim rejected and file legal action without waiting for the county to act.




                                                                             MARCH 2025 | CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX     13
 TAX COLLECTION

Secured Roll
The county tax collector is responsible for preparing property tax bills. Bills for the regular secured assessment roll
(generally real property) are mailed by November 1 and are due in two equal installments. The first installment is
due November 1 and becomes delinquent December 10. The second installment is due on February 1 and becomes
delinquent April 10.
If taxes are not paid by the delinquent date, there is a 10 percent penalty. If a taxpayer receives a notice of
impending default, and the taxes remain unpaid on the date the notice says they are due, the property is declared
tax-defaulted. Monthly redemption penalties of 1.5 percent are added to the unpaid taxes. The property owner has
the right to redeem the property by paying the taxes, penalties, and costs within five years of the date the property
becomes tax-defaulted. If the property is not redeemed within five years, the property may be sold at public
auction or acquired by a public agency.

Unsecured Roll
Property on the unsecured roll is primarily tenant-owned personal property and fixtures (such as office equipment
and machinery), boats, aircraft, and possessory interests. Property taxes on the unsecured roll are due in one
payment. They are due on January 1 and become delinquent August 31. The property tax rate on unsecured
property is based on the previous year’s secured property tax rate.
To collect delinquent property taxes on the unsecured roll, the tax collector may seize and sell the property, file suit
for taxes owed, seek a summary judgment against the assessee, or file a certificate of lien.

Supplemental Roll
The Supplemental Assessment Roll contains a listing of all property that has undergone a change in ownership or
experienced new construction. Taxes on the supplemental roll are due on various dates depending on when the
tax bill is mailed. If the bill is mailed between July 1 and October 31, taxes become delinquent on the same days
as the regular secured roll (December 10 and April 10). If the bill is mailed between November 1 and June 30, the
first installment becomes delinquent on the last day of the month following the month the bill was mailed, and the
second installment becomes delinquent the last day of the fourth month following the month in which the first
installment became delinquent.
Delinquent supplemental assessments are declared in default if the second installment is delinquent at the time
the notice of impending default says they are due. A delinquency in supplemental tax leads to default of the entire
property, even though “regular” taxes have been paid. Monthly redemption penalties of 1.5 percent accrue, and the
property is subject to sale after five years if taxes are not paid.




14     CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX | MARCH 2025
 GLOSSARY OF PROPERTY TAX TERMS
Ad Valorem Property Tax
A tax imposed on the basis of value.
Assessed Value
The taxable value of a property against which the tax rate is applied.
Base Year Value
For real property assessed under Proposition 13, its fair market value as of either the 1975 lien date or the date the
property was purchased, newly constructed, or underwent a change in ownership after the 1975 lien date.
Change in Ownership
A transfer of a present interest in real property, including its beneficial use, the value of which is substantially equal
to the value of the fee interest (or, in other words, equal to the value of the full estate) in the property.
Fixture
An item of tangible property, the nature of which was originally personal property, but which is classified as real
property for property tax purposes because it is physically or constructively attached to real property with the
intent that it remain attached indefinitely.
Full Cash Value or Fair Market Value
The amount of cash or its equivalent that property would bring if exposed for sale in the open market under
conditions in which all of the following occur:
  • Neither buyer nor seller could take advantage of the needs of the other.
  • Both buyer and seller have knowledge of all of the uses and purposes to which the property is adapted and for
    which it is capable of being used.
  • Both buyer and seller are aware of any enforceable restrictions on the property’s uses and purposes.
Full Value
Full value means fair market value, full cash value, or another value standard prescribed by the California
Constitution or in the Revenue and Taxation Code under the authorization of the Constitution.
Improvements
Improvements include:
  • All buildings, structures, fixtures, and fences erected on or attached to the land.
  • All fruit, nut bearing, or ornamental trees and vines, not growing naturally, and not exempt from taxation,
    except date palms under eight years old.
Lien Date
12:01 a.m. on January 1 preceding the fiscal year for which taxes are collected. The time that property is valued for
tax purposes and when taxes become a lien on property.
New Construction
Any addition to real property, whether land or improvements (including fixtures) since the last lien date; or any
alteration of land or improvements (including fixtures) since the last lien date that constitutes a major rehabilitation
or that converts the property to a different use.
Personal Property
All tangible property except real estate. See also “real property.”
Possessory Interest
The taxable, private, beneficial use and enjoyment of nontaxable, publicly owned real property as defined in
section 107 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and in taxable, publicly owned real property subject to the
provisions of sections 3(a), (b), and 11 of Article XIII of the California Constitution.



                                                                               MARCH 2025 | CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX      15
Real Property
Real estate or real property includes all of the following:
  • The possession of, claim to, ownership of, or right to the possession of land.
  • All mines, minerals, and quarries in the land, all standing timber whether or not belonging to the owner of the
    land, and all pertinent rights and privileges.
  • Improvements.
Roll
A listing of all assessable property within the county. It identifies the property, the owner (if known), and the
assessed value of the property. Every year the county assessor must prepare two separate rolls: the “Regular
Assessment Roll“ (section 601 Roll), and the “Supplemental Assessment Roll.”
Regular Assessment Roll (section 601 Roll)
The Regular Assessment Roll consists of:
     1. The “Board Roll,” which lists all property that the BOE is required to assess. This roll is prepared by the BOE
        and delivered to the county auditor.
     2. The “Local Roll,” which lists all property assessed by the county, is divided into at least two parts:
        a. The “Secured Assessment Roll,” which contains state-assessed property and locally assessed property.
           The taxes on the property are adequately secured by a lien on the real property.
        b. The “Unsecured Assessment Roll,” which contains property that is not secured to real property or is not
           a lien against real property. It consists largely of business personal property owned by tenants.
Supplemental Assessment Roll
The “Supplemental Assessment Roll” contains a listing of all property that has undergone a change in ownership or
experienced new construction since the prior “Local Roll” was established.
Secured Tax Rate
The percentage at which property on the secured roll is taxed. Taxes on real property cannot exceed 1 percent
of its taxable value plus an amount to pay the interest and redemption charges on: (1) debts approved by voters
prior to June 6, 1978; (2) debts approved by a two-thirds vote of the qualified voters after that date; or (3) effective
January 1, 2001, certain bonded indebtedness for school facilities approved by 55 percent of the voters.
Severance Tax
A tax on mineral or forest products at the time they are removed or severed from the soil, usually regarded as a
form of property taxation.
State Assessees
Certain owners and users of property assessed by the BOE on the Board roll.
Supplemental Assessment
A property tax assessment made in accordance with chapter 3.5 of part 0.5 of division 1 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code. Supplemental assessments are made whenever a property, or a portion of it, changes ownership or
experiences new construction.
The amount of each supplemental assessment is the difference between the property’s new base year value—
determined as of the date of change in ownership or completion of new construction—and the existing taxable value.
Taxable Value
For real property subject to Article XIII A, the base year full value adjusted for inflation for any given lien date as
required by law, or the full cash value for the same lien date, whichever is less.
Unsecured Tax Rate
Previous year’s secured property tax rate.




16      CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX | MARCH 2025
    FOR MORE INFORMATION
Below is a list of additional information/resources available on the BOE website at www.boe.ca.gov.

Revenue and Taxation Code and Other Statutes
The legislative implementation and interpretation of the state constitutional provisions applicable to property tax
assessment matters are found in the Revenue and Taxation Code. These statutes provide the framework of the
property tax assessment process. In addition, the Revenue and Taxation Code sections may incorporate and follow
the provisions of other codes; for example, Government Code sections 15602 and following sections implement the
constitutional provisions relating to the authority of the California State Board of Equalization.

Property Tax Rules
Government Code section 15606 provides that the “State Board of Equalization shall ... [p]rescribe rules and
regulations to govern local boards of equalization when equalizing, and assessors when assessing, including uniform
procedures for the consideration and adoption of written findings of fact by local boards of equalization....” Title 18,
Public Revenues, of the California Code of Regulations contains the body of regulations that the Board has adopted
to implement, interpret, and make specific the statutes governing the property tax assessment process, change
in ownership, and the functions of assessment appeals boards and boards of equalization. These regulations are
commonly referred to as Property Tax Rules.

Assessors’ Handbook Sections
The Assessors’ Handbook is a collection of manuals or sections adopted and published by the California State Board of
Equalization. The manuals address property tax appraisal and assessment practices. Prior to adoption, each manual
undergoes a process whereby interested parties participate in drafting the language, and interested parties are
afforded an opportunity to submit written comments or to address the Board during a public hearing regarding the
final language.
The Assessors’ Handbook and other Board-approved publications do not have the force of law. Instead, they provide
advisory notice to county assessors and appeals boards of the Board’s interpretation, analyses, conclusions, and
recommendations concerning problems of general concern, and often document court decisions, legislative
enactments, or other legal and policy information. While Board-adopted publications are advisory only, courts
have held that they may be properly considered as evidence in the adjudicatory process.2

Publications
Property tax publications provide basic information on the specific property tax topic addressed in the publication. In
any instance where there is an inconsistency between a statute or regulation and a publication or other document,
statutory or regulatory law is controlling.

Forms
Government Code section 15606, subdivision (d), provides that the California State Board of Equalization (BOE) shall:
Prescribe and enforce the use of all forms for the assessment of property for taxation, including forms to be used
for the application for reduction in assessment. In addition to section 15606, the Legislature has enacted numerous
statutes mandating forms for use in particular property tax programs and has specified that the Board shall prescribe
the content of the forms after consultation with interested parties. Both the forms prescribed pursuant to section
15606 and the forms prescribed pursuant to specific statutes are referred to as Board-prescribed forms.


Coca-Cola Co. v. State Board of Equalization (1945) 25 Cal.2d 918; Prudential Ins. Co. v. County of San Francisco (1987) 191 Cal.App.3d 1142; Hunt-Wesson
2

Foods, Inc. v. County of Alameda (1974) 41 Cal.App.3d 163.



                                                                                                   MARCH 2025 | CALIFORNIA PROPERTY TAX                     17
          CALIFORNIA STATE BOARD OF EQUALIZATION
MAILING ADDRESS: P.O. BOX 942879 • SACRAMENTO, CA 94279-0001
