Hiring a
Contractor




    Federal Trade Commission | consumer.ftc.gov
A   dding a room, renovating
    a basement, or doing some
much-needed repairs? Finding
a good contractor is important
— a home improvement project
gone wrong can cost you. A
good ad isn’t proof a contractor
does quality work. Find out for
yourself. Check with friends,
neighbors, or co-workers who’ve
had improvement work done,
and check out a contractor’s
reputation on online ratings sites
you trust. Get written estimates
from several firms, keeping in
mind the lowest bidder may
not be the best choice. Also
important: know the signs of a
scam.



                                     1
    Finding a Contractor
    Depending on how big or complex a project is, you might
    hire a:

       ●● general contractor, who manages all aspects
          of a project, including hiring and supervising
          subcontractors, getting building permits, and
          scheduling inspections
       ●● specialty contractor, who installs particular products
          like cabinets and bathroom fixtures
       ●● architect, who designs homes, additions, and major
          renovations — especially ones involving structural
          changes
       ●● designer or design/build contractor, who provides
          both services

    Do Your Research
    Check with friends, neighbors, or co-workers who’ve
    used a contractor
    If you can, take a look at the work done and ask about their
    experience.
    Look at sites you trust that post ratings and reviews
    Do people seem to have similar experiences, good or bad?
    You also can check out a contractor’s online reputation by
    searching for the company’s name with words like “scam,”
    “rip-off,” or “complaint.”
    Find out how long they’ve been in business
    Look for an established company whose record and
    reputation you can check out.


2
Check for qualifications, like licensing
Many states, but not all, require contractors to be licensed
and/or bonded. Check with your local building department
or consumer protection agency to find out about licensing
requirements in your area. Licensing can range from simple
registration to a detailed qualification process. If your state
or locality has licensing laws, make sure the contractor’s
license is current.


Before You Hire a Contractor

Get Estimates
Once you’ve narrowed your options, get written estimates
from several firms. Don’t automatically choose the lowest
bidder. Ask for an explanation to see if there’s a reason for
the difference in price.

Ask Questions
How many projects like mine have you completed in
the last year?
Ask for a list so you can see how familiar the contractor is
with your type of project.
Will my project require a permit?
Most states and localities require permits for building
projects, even for simple jobs like decks. A competent
contractor will get all the necessary permits before starting
work on your project. You may want to choose a contractor
familiar with the permitting process in your county, city, or
town.



                                                                  3
    May I have a list of references?
    A contractor should be able to give you names, addresses,
    and phone numbers of at least three clients with projects
    like yours. Ask each client how long ago the project was
    and whether it was completed on time. Was the client
    satisfied? Were there any unexpected costs? Did workers
    show up on time and clean up after finishing the job? You
    also could tell the contractor that you’d like to visit jobs in
    progress.
    What types of insurance do you carry?
    Contractors should have:

       ●● personal liability
       ●● worker’s compensation
       ●● property damage coverage
    Ask for copies of insurance certificates, and make sure
    they’re current, or you could be held liable for any injuries
    and damages that occur during the project.
    Will you be using subcontractors on this project?
    If so, make sure the subcontractors have current insurance
    coverage and licenses, too, if required.

    To find builders, remodelers, and related providers in your
    area that are members of the National Association of Home
    Builders, visit www.nahb.org. To find detailed information
    about a builder, service provider, or remodeler in your area,
    contact your local home builders association. You can find
    your local association at www.nahb.org.




4
Understand Your Payment Options
Don’t pay cash
For smaller projects, you can pay by check or credit card.
Many people arrange financing for larger projects.
Try to limit your down payment
Some state laws limit the amount of money a contractor
can request as a down payment. Contact your state or local
consumer agency to find out the law in your area.
Try to make payments during the project contingent
upon completion of defined amounts of work
This way, if the work isn’t going according to schedule, the
payments to your contractor also are delayed.

Get a Written Contract
Contract requirements vary by state. Even if your state
doesn’t require a written agreement, ask for one. It should
be clear and concise and include the who, what, where,
when, and cost of your project. Before you sign a contract,
make sure it includes:

   ●● the contractor’s name, address, phone, and license
      number (if required)
   ●● an estimated start and completion date
   ●● the payment schedule
      for the contractor,
      subcontractors, and
      suppliers
   ●● the contractor’s obligation
      to get all necessary permits



                                                               5
    ●● how change orders are handled. A change order is
       a written authorization to the contractor to make
       a change or addition to the work described in the
       original contract, and could affect the project’s cost
       and schedule.
    ●● a detailed list of all materials including each
       product’s color, model, size, and brand. If some
       materials will be chosen later, the contract should say
       who’s responsible for choosing each item and how
       much money is budgeted for it (this is also known as
       the “allowance”).
    ●● information about warranties covering materials and
       workmanship, with names and addresses of who
       is honoring them — the contractor, distributor, or
       manufacturer. The length of the warranty period and
       any limitations also should be spelled out.
    ●● what the contractor will and won’t do. For example,
       is site clean-up and trash hauling included in
       the price? Ask for a “broom clause” that makes
       the contractor responsible for all clean-up work,
       including spills and stains.
    ●● any promises made during conversations or calls. If
       they don’t remember, you may be out of luck — or
       charged extra.
    ●● a written statement of your right to cancel the
       contract within three business days if you signed it
       in your home or at a location other than the seller’s
       permanent place of business




6
After You Hire a Contractor

Keep Records
Keep all paperwork related to your project in one place.
This includes:

   ●● copies of the contract
   ●● change orders
   ●● any correspondence with your home improvement
      professionals
   ●● a record of all payments. You may need receipts for
      tax purposes.
Keep a log or journal of all phone calls, conversations, and
activities. You also might want to take photographs as the
job progresses. These records are especially important if
you have problems with your project — during or after
construction.

Pay Wisely
Don’t make the final payment or sign an affidavit of
final release until you’re satisfied
Besides being satisfied with the work, you also need to
know that subcontractors and suppliers have been paid.
Laws in your state might allow them to file a mechanic’s
lien against your home to satisfy their unpaid bills, forcing
you to sell your home to pay them. Protect yourself by
asking the contractor, and every subcontractor and supplier,
for a lien release or lien waiver.




                                                                7
    Know the limit for the final bill
    Some state or local laws limit the amount by which the
    final bill can exceed the estimate, unless you have approved
    the increase.
    Know when you can withhold payment
    If you have a problem with merchandise or services
    charged to a credit card, and you’ve made a good faith
    effort to work out the problem with the seller, you have
    the right to contact your credit card company and withhold
    payment from the card issuer for the merchandise or
    services. You can withhold payment up to the amount of
    credit outstanding for the purchase, plus any finance or
    related charges.

    Use a Sign-Off Checklist
    Before you sign off and make the final payment, check that:

       ●● all work meets the standards spelled out in the
          contract
       ●● you have written warranties for materials and
          workmanship
       ●● you have proof that all subcontractors and suppliers
          have been paid
       ●● the job site has been cleaned up and cleared of excess
          materials, tools, and equipment
       ●● you have inspected and approved the completed work




8
Signs of a Home Improvement Scam
How can you tell if a contractor might not be reputable?
You may not want to do business with someone who:

   ●● knocks on your door for business or offers you
      discounts for finding other customers
   ●● just happens to have materials left over from a
      previous job
   ●● pressures you for an immediate decision
   ●● only accepts cash, asks you to pay everything
      up-front, or suggests you borrow money from a
      lender the contractor knows
   ●● asks you to get the required building permits
   ●● tells you your job will be a “demonstration” or offers
      a lifetime warranty or long-term guarantee
   ●● doesn’t list a business number in the local telephone
      directory

The Home Improvement Loan Scam
Here’s how it works: a contractor calls or comes to your
door and offers a deal to install a new roof or remodel your
kitchen. He says he can arrange financing through a lender
he knows. After he starts, he asks you to sign papers; they
may be blank — or he might hustle you along and not give
you time to read through them. Later you find out you’ve
agreed to a home equity loan with a high interest rate,
points, and fees. What’s worse, the work on your home
isn’t done right or isn’t completed, and the contractor —
who may already have been paid by the lender — has lost
interest.


                                                               9
     To avoid a loan scam, don’t:

        ●● agree to a home equity loan if you don’t have the
           money to make the payments
        ●● sign a document you haven’t read or that has blank
           spaces to be filled in after you sign
        ●● let anyone pressure you into signing any document
        ●● deed your property to anyone. Consult an attorney, a
           knowledgeable family member, or someone else you
           trust if you’re asked to.
        ●● agree to financing through your contractor without
           shopping around and comparing loan terms

     Report a Problem
     If you have a problem with a home improvement project,
     first try to resolve it with the contractor. Many disputes can
     be resolved at this level. Follow any phone conversations
     with a letter you send by certified mail. Request a return
     receipt. That’s your proof that the company received your
     letter. Keep a copy for your files.

     If that fails, consider getting outside help like:

        ●● your state attorney general or local consumer
           protection office
           www.usa.gov/directory/stateconsumer
        ●● your local home builders association
           www.nahb.org
        ●● your local media’s call for action lines
           www.callforaction.org
        ●● dispute resolution programs
           www.consumer.ftc.gov

10
For More Information
National Association of Home Builders
www.nahb.org
National Association of the Remodeling Industry
www.nari.org
The American Institute of Architects
architectfinder.aia.org
ENERGY STAR
www.energystar.gov/newhomes


The FTC works to prevent fraudulent, deceptive, and
unfair business practices in the marketplace and to provide
information to help consumers spot, stop, and avoid them.
To file a complaint or get free information on consumer
issues, visit ftc.gov or call toll-free, 1-877-FTC-HELP
(1-877-382-4357); TTY: 1-866-653-4261.

Watch a video, How to File a Complaint, at
consumer.ftc.gov/media to learn more. The FTC enters
consumer complaints into the Consumer Sentinel Network,
a secure online database and investigative tool used by
hundreds of civil and criminal law enforcement agencies in
the U.S. and abroad.




                                                              11
12
Federal Trade Commission
consumer.ftc.gov
March 2014
