FAIR HOUSING         Equal Opportunity for All




U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
     Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity




        Please visit our website: www.hud.gov/fairhousing
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All

         Fair Housing – Equal Opportunity for All
America, in every way, represents equality of opportunity for all persons.
The rich diversity of its citizens and the spirit of unity that binds us all
symbolize the principles of freedom and justice upon which this nation
was founded. That is why it is extremely disturbing when new immigrants,
minorities, families with children, and persons with disabilities are denied
the housing of their choice because of illegal discrimination.

The Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) enforces
the Fair Housing Act, which prohibits discrimination and the intimidation
of people in their homes, apartment buildings, and condominium
developments – in nearly all housing transactions, including the rental and
sale of housing and the provision of mortgage loans.

Equal access to rental housing and homeownership opportunities is the
cornerstone of this nation’s federal housing policy. Housing providers who
refuse to rent or sell homes to people based on race, color, national origin,
religion, sex, familial status, or disability are violating federal law, and HUD
will vigorously pursue enforcement actions against them.

Housing discrimination is not only illegal, it contradicts in every way the
principles of freedom and opportunity we treasure as Americans. HUD is
committed to ensuring that everyone is treated equally when searching for
a place to call home.

Contents
 The Fair Housing Act.............................................................................1
 What Housing Is Covered?....................................................................1
 What Is Prohibited?...............................................................................1
 Additional Protection If You Have A Disability........................................3
 Housing Protection For Families With Children.....................................5
 If You Think Your Rights Have Been Violated........................................6
 What Happens When You File A Complaint?......................................10
 What Happens If I’m Going To Lose My Housing
 Through Eviction or Sale?...................................................................11
 What Happens After A Complaint Investigation?.................................12
 In Addition............................................................................................14

               U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
                    451 7th Street, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20410-2000

                                                     i
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All




                                         ii
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All



The Fair Housing Act

         The Fair Housing Act prohibits discrimination
         in housing because of:

          •   Race or color
          •   National Origin
          •   Religion
          •   Sex
          •   Familial status (including children under the age of 18 living with
              parents or legal custodians; pregnant women and people securing
              custody of children under 18)
          •   Disability

What Housing is Covered?

          The Fair Housing Act covers most housing. In some circumstances,
          the Act exempts owner-occupied buildings with no more than four
          units, single-family housing sold or rented without the use of a broker
          and housing operated by organizations and private clubs that limit
          occupancy to members.

What is Prohibited?

In the Sale and Rental of Housing: No one may take any of the following
        actions based on race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status,
        or national origin:

          •    Refuse to rent or sell housing
          •    Refuse to negotiate for housing
          •    Make housing unavailable
          •    Otherwise deny a dwelling
          •    Set different terms, conditions or privileges for sale or rental of a
               dwelling
          •    Provide different housing services or facilities
          •    Falsely deny that housing is available for inspection, sale or rental

                                         1
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All

          •    For profit, persuade, or try to persuade homeowners to sell or
               rent dwellings by suggesting that people of a particular race,
               etc. have moved, or are about to move into the neighborhood
               (blockbusting) or
          •    Deny any person access to, membership or participation
               in, any organization, facility or service (such as a multiple
               listing service) related to the sale or rental of dwellings, or
               discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of
               such access, membership or participation.

In Mortgage Lending: No one may take any of the following actions
       based on race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or
       national origin:

          •    Refuse to make a mortgage loan
          •    Refuse to provide information regarding loans
          •    Impose different terms or conditions on a loan, such as
               different interest rates, points, or fees
          •    Discriminate in appraising property
          •    Refuse to purchase a loan or
          •    Set different terms or conditions for purchasing a loan.
          •    In addition, it is a violation of the Fair Housing Act to:
          •    Threaten, coerce, intimidate or interfere with anyone exercising
               a fair housing right or assisting others who exercise the right
          •    Make, print, or publish any statement, in connection with the
               sale or rental of a dwelling, which indicates a preference,
               limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex,
               disability, familial status, or national origin. This prohibition
               against discriminatory advertising applies to single-family and
               owner-occupied housing that is otherwise exempt from the
               Fair Housing Act
          •    Refuse to provide homeowners insurance coverage for a
               dwelling because of the race, color, religion, sex, disability,
               familial status, or national origin of the owner and/or occupants
               of a dwelling
          •    Discriminate in the terms or conditions of homeowners
               insurance coverage because of the race, color, religion, sex,
               disability, familial status, or national origin of the owner and/or
               occupants of a dwelling
                                         2
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All

          •    Refuse to provide available information on the full range of
               homeowners insurance coverage options available because
               of the race, etc. of the owner and/or occupants of a dwelling
          •    Make print or publish any statement, in connection with the
               provision of homeowners insurance coverage, that indicates
               a preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color,
               religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin.

Additional Protection If You Have a Disability

          If you or someone associated with you:

          •    Have a physical or mental disability (including hearing, mobility
               and visual impairments, cancer, chronic mental illness, HIV/
               AIDS, or mental retardation) that substantially limits one or
               more major life activities
          •    Have a record of such a disability or
          •    Are regarded as having such a disability, a housing provider
               may not:

               -   Refuse to let you make reasonable modifications to your
                   dwelling or common use areas, at your expense, if it may
                   be necessary for you to fully use the housing. (Where
                   reasonable, a landlord may permit changes only if you
                   agree to restore the property to its original condition when
                   you move.)
               -   Refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules,
                   policies, practices or services if it may be necessary for
                   you to use the housing on an equal basis with nondisabled
                   persons.

Example: A building with a “no pets” policy must allow a visually impaired
         tenant to keep a guide dog.

Example: An apartment complex that offers tenants ample, unassigned
         parking must honor a request from a mobility-impaired tenant
		 for a reserved space near her apartment if it may be necessary
		 to assure that she can have access to her apartment.

                                         3
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All

          However, the Fair Housing Act does not protect a person who is a
          direct threat to the health or safety of others or who currently uses
          illegal drugs.

Accessibility Requirements for New Multifamily Buildings: In buildings
      with four or more units that were first occupied after
      March 13, 1991, and that have an elevator:

          •   Public and common use areas must be accessible to persons
              with disabilities
          •   All doors and hallways must be wide enough for wheelchairs
          •   All units must have:
               - An accessible route into and through the unit
               - Accessible light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats
                   and other environmental controls
               - Reinforced bathroom walls to allow later installation of
                   grab bars and
               - Kitchens and bathrooms that can be used by people in
                   wheelchairs.

         If a building with four or more units has no elevator and was first
         occupied after March 13, 1991, these standards apply to ground
         floor units only.

         These accessibility requirements for new multifamily buildings do
         not replace more stringent accessibility standards required under
         State or local law.




Housing Protection for Families with Children
                                         4
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All

The Fair Housing Act makes it unlawful to discriminate against a person
whose household includes one or more children who are under 18 years
of age (familial status). Familial status protection covers households in
which one or more minor children live with:

          •    A parent;
          •    A person who has legal custody (including guardianship) of a
               minor child or children; or
          •    The designee of a parent or legal custodian, with the written
               permission of the parent or legal custodian.

          Familial status protection also extends to pregnant women and
          any person in the process of securing legal custody of a minor
          child (including adoptive or foster parents).

The “Housing for Older Persons” Exemption: The Fair Housing
      Act specifically exempts some senior housing facilities and
      communities from liability for familial status discrimination. Exempt
      senior housing facilities or communities can lawfully refuse to
      sell or rent dwellings to families with minor children. In order to
      qualify for the “housing for older persons” exemption, a facility or
      community must prove that its housing is:

          •    Provided under any State or Federal program that HUD has
               determined to be specifically designed and operated to assist
               elderly persons (as defined in the State or Federal program);
               or
          •    Intended for, and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age
               or older; or
          •    Intended and operated for occupancy by persons 55 years of
               age or older.

         In order to qualify for the “55 or older” housing exemption,
         a facility or community must satisfy each of the following
         requirements:
          • at least 80 percent of the units must have at least one
             occupant who is 55 years of age or older; and



                                         5
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All

          •    the facility or community must publish and adhere to policies
               and procedures that demonstrate the intent to operate as “55
               or older” housing; and
          •    the facility or community must comply with HUD’s regulatory
               requirements for age verification of residents.

          The “housing for older persons” exemption does not protect
          senior housing facilities or communities from liability for housing
          discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, disability, or
          national origin.

          HUD is ready to help with any problem of housing discrimination.
          If you think your rights have been violated, you may file a
          complaint online, write a letter or telephone the HUD office
          nearest you. You have one year after the alleged discrimination
          occurred or ended to file a complaint with HUD, but you should
          file it as soon as possible.

If You Think your Rights Have Been Violated

What to Tell HUD:

          •    Your name and address
          •    The name and address of the person your complaint is against
               (the respondent)
          •    The address or other identification of the housing involved
          •    A short description of the alleged violation (the event that
               caused you to believe your rights were violated)
          •    The date(s) of the alleged violation.

Where to Write or Call: File a complaint online, send a letter to the HUD
office nearest you, or if you wish, you may call that office directly. Persons
who are deaf or hard of hearing and use a TTY, may call those offices
through the toll-free Federal Information Relay Service at 1-800-877-8339.


For Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island
and Vermont:

                                         6
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All

BOSTON REGIONAL OFFICE
(Complaints_office_01@hud.gov)
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Thomas P. O’Neill Jr. Federal Building
10 Causeway Street, Room 321
Boston, MA 02222-1092
Telephone (617) 994-8300 or 1-800-827-5005
Fax (617) 565-7313 * TTY (617) 565-5453

For New Jersey, New York, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands:
NEW YORK REGIONAL OFFICE
(Complaints_office_02@hud.gov)
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
26 Federal Plaza, Room 3532
New York, NY 10278-0068
Telephone (212) 542-7519 or 1-800-496-4294
Fax (212) 264-9829 * TTY (212) 264-0927

For Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia and
West Virginia:
PHILADELPHIA REGIONAL OFFICE
(Complaints_office_03@hud.gov)
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
The Wanamaker Building
100 Penn Square East
Philadelphia, PA 19107-9344
Telephone (215) 861-7646 or 1-888-799-2085
Fax (215) 656-3449 * TTY (215) 656-3450




For Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Tennessee:


                                         7
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All

ATLANTA REGIONAL OFFICE
(Complaints_office_04@hud.gov)
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Five Points Plaza
40 Marietta Street, 16th Floor
Atlanta, GA 30303-2808
Telephone (404) 331-5140 or 1-800-440-8091 x2493
Fax (404) 331-1021 * TTY (404) 730-2654

For Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio and Wisconsin:
CHICAGO REGIONAL OFFICE
(Complaints_office_05@hud.gov)
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Ralph H. Metcalfe Federal Building
77 West Jackson Boulevard, Room 2101
Chicago, IL 60604-3507
Telephone 1-800-765-9372
Fax (312) 886-2837 * TTY (312) 353-7143

For Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas:
FORT WORTH REGIONAL OFFICE
(Complaints_office_06@hud.gov)
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
801 Cherry Street
Suite 2500, Unit #45
Fort Worth, TX 76102-6803
Telephone (817) 978-5900 or 1-888-560-8913
Fax (817) 978-5876/5851 * TTY (817) 978-5595




For Iowa, Kansas, Missouri and Nebraska:
KANSAS CITY REGIONAL OFFICE



                                         8
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All

(Complaints_office_07@hud.gov)
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Gateway Tower II
400 State Avenue, Room 200, 4th Floor
Kansas City, KS 66101-2406
Telephone (913) 551-6958 or 1-800-743-5323
Fax (913) 551-6856 * TTY (913) 551-6972

For Colorado, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah and Wyoming:
DENVER REGIONAL OFFICE
(Complaints_office_08@hud.gov)
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
1670 Broadway
Denver, CO 80202-4801
Telephone (303) 672-5437 or 1-800-877-7353
Fax (303) 672-5026 * TTY (303) 672-5248

For Arizona, California, Hawaii and Nevada:
SAN FRANCISCO REGIONAL OFFICE
(Complaints_office_09@hud.gov)
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
600 Harrison Street, Third Floor
San Francisco, CA 94107-1387
Telephone 1-800-347-3739
Fax (415) 489-6558 * TTY (415) 489-6564

For Alaska, Idaho, Oregon and Washington:
SEATTLE REGIONAL OFFICE
(Complaints_office_10@hud.gov)
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Seattle Federal Office Building
909 First Avenue, Room 205
Seattle, WA 98104-1000
Telephone (206) 220-5170 or 1-800-877-0246
Fax (206) 220-5447 * TTY (206) 220-5185




                                         9
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All

If after contacting the local office nearest you, you still have questions –
you may contact HUD further at:

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity
451 7th Street, S.W., Room 5204
Washington, DC 20410-2000
Telephone 1-800-669-9777
Fax (202) 708-1425 * TTY 1-800-927-9275
www.hud.gov/fairhousing

If You Are Disabled: HUD also provides:

          •    A TTY phone for the deaf/hard of hearing users (see above
               list for the nearest HUD office)
          •    Interpreters, Tapes and Braille materials
          •    Assistance in reading and completing forms

What Happens When You File A Complaint?

         HUD will notify you in writing when your complaint is accepted for
         filing under the Fair Housing Act. HUD also will:

          •    Notify the alleged violator (respondent) of the filing of your
               complaint, and allow the respondent time to submit a written
               answer to the complaint.
          •    Investigate your complaint, and determine whether or not
               there is reasonable cause to believe that the respondent
               violated the Fair Housing Act.
          •    Notify you and the respondent if HUD cannot complete its
               investigation within 100 days of filing your complaint, and
               provide reason for the delay.

Fair Housing Act Conciliation: During the complaint investigation, HUD
       is required to offer you and the respondent the opportunity to
       voluntarily resolve your complaint with a Conciliation Agreement.



                                         10
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All

          A Conciliation Agreement provides individual relief to you, and
          protects the public interest by deterring future discrimination by
          the respondent. Once you and the respondent sign a Conciliation
          Agreement, and HUD approves the Agreement, HUD will cease
          investigating your complaint. If you believe that the respondent
          has violated breached your Conciliation Agreement, you should
          promptly notify the HUD Office that investigated your complaint. If
          HUD determines that there is reasonable cause to believe that the
          respondent violated the Agreement, HUD will ask the U.S.
          Department of Justice to file suit against the respondent in Federal
          District Court to enforce the terms of the Agreement.

Complaint Referrals to State or Local Public Fair Housing Agencies:
      If HUD has certified that your State or local public fair housing
      agency enforces a civil rights law or ordinance that provides rights,
      remedies and protections that are “substantially equivalent” to
      the Fair Housing Act, HUD must promptly refer your complaint to
      that agency for investigation, and must promptly notify you of the
      referral. The State or local agency will investigate your complaint
      under the “substantially equivalent” State or local civil rights law
      or ordinance. The State or local public fair housing agency must
      start investigating your complaint within 30 days of HUD’s referral,
      or HUD may retrieve (“reactivate”) the complaint for investigation
      under the Fair Housing Act.

What Happens If I’m Going to Lose My Housing
Through Eviction or Sale?

          If you need immediate help to stop or prevent a severe problem
          caused by a Fair Housing Act violation, HUD may be able to assist
          you as soon as you file a complaint. HUD may authorize the U.S.
          Department of Justice to file a Motion in Federal District Court
          for a Temporary Restraining Order (TRO) against the respondent,
          followed by a Preliminary Injunction pending the outcome of HUD’s
          investigation. A Federal Judge may grant a TRO or a Preliminary
          Injunction against a respondent in cases where:



                                         11
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All

          •    Irreparable (irreversible) harm or injury to housing rights is
               likely to occur without HUD’s intervention; and
          •    There is substantial evidence that the respondent has violated
               the Fair Housing Act.

Example: An owner agrees to sell a house, but, after discovering that the
      buyers are black, pulls the house off the market, then promptly
      lists it for sale again. The buyers file a discrimination complaint
      with HUD. HUD may authorize the U.S. Department of Justice to
      seek an injunction in Federal District Court to prevent the owner
      from selling the house to anyone else until HUD investigates the
      complaint.

What Happens After A Complaint Investigation?

Determination of Reasonable Cause, Charge of Discrimination, and
       Election: When your complaint investigation is complete, HUD
       will prepare a Final Investigative Report summarizing the evidence
       gathered during the investigation. If HUD determines that there is
       reasonable cause to believe that the respondent(s) discriminated
       against you, HUD will issue a Determination of Reasonable
       Cause and a Charge of Discrimination against the respondent(s).
       You and the respondent(s) have twenty (20) days after receiving
       notice of the Charge to decide whether to have your case heard
       by a HUD Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) or to have a civil trial in
       Federal District Court.

HUD Administrative Law Judge Hearing: If neither you nor the
     respondent elects to have a Federal civil trial before the 20-day
     Election Period expires, HUD will promptly schedule a Hearing for
     your case before a HUD ALJ. The ALJ Hearing will be conducted
     in the locality where the discrimination allegedly occurred. During
     the ALJ Hearing, you and the respondent(s) have the right to
     appear in person, to be represented by legal counsel, to present
     evidence, to cross-examine witnesses and to request subpoenas
     in aid of discovery of evidence. HUD attorneys will represent you
     during the ALJ Hearing at no cost to you; however, you may also



                                         12
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All

          choose to intervene in the case and retain your own attorney. At
          the conclusion of the Hearing, the HUD ALJ will issue a Decision
          based on findings of fact and conclusions of law. If the HUD ALJ
          concludes that the respondent(s) violated the Fair Housing Act,
          the respondent(s) can be ordered to:

          •    Compensate you for actual damages, including out-of-pocket
               expenses and emotional distress damages
          •    Provide permanent injunctive relief.
          •    Provide appropriate equitable relief (for example, make the
               housing available to you).
          •    Pay your reasonable attorney’s fees.
          •    Pay a civil penalty to HUD to vindicate the public interest. The
               maximum civil penalties are: $16,000, for a first violation of
               the Act; $37,500 if a previous violation has occurred within
               the preceding five-year period; and $65,000 if two or more
               previous violations have occurred within the preceding
               seven-year period.

Civil Trial in Federal District Court: If either you or the respondent elects
         to have a Federal civil trial for your complaint, HUD must refer
         your case to the U.S. Department of Justice for enforcement. The
         U.S. Department of Justice will file a civil lawsuit on your behalf
         in the U.S. District Court in the district in which the discrimination
         allegedly occurred. You also may choose to intervene in the case
         and retain your own attorney. Either you or the respondent may
         request a jury trial, and you each have the right to appear in
         person, to be represented by legal counsel, to present evidence,
         to cross-examine witnesses, and to request subpoenas in aid of
         discovery of evidence. If the Federal Court decides in your favor,
         a Judge or jury may order the respondent(s) to:

          •    Compensate you for actual damages, including out-of-pocket
               expenses and emotional distress damages
          •    Provide permanent injunctive relief.
          •    Provide appropriate equitable relief (for example, make the
               housing available to you).
          •    Pay your reasonable attorney’s fees.
          •    Pay punitive damages to you.

                                         13
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All

Determination of No Reasonable Cause and Dismissal: If HUD
       finds that there is no reasonable cause to believe that the
       respondent(s) violated the Act, HUD will dismiss your complaint
       with a Determination of No Reasonable Cause. HUD will notify
       you and the respondent(s) of the dismissal by mail, and you may
       request a copy of the Final Investigative Report.

Reconsiderations of No Reasonable Cause Determinations: The Fair
      Housing Act provides no formal appeal process for complaints
      dismissed by HUD. However, if your complaint is dismissed with
      a Determination of No Reasonable Cause, you may submit a
      written request for a reconsideration review to: Director, FHEO
      Office of Enforcement, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
      Development, 451 7th Street, SW, Room 5206, Washington, DC
      20410-2000.

In Addition

You May File a Private Lawsuit: You may file a private civil lawsuit without
      first filing a complaint with HUD. You must file your lawsuit within
      two (2) years of the most recent date of alleged discriminatory
      action.

         If you do file a complaint with HUD and even if HUD dismisses
         your complaint, the Fair Housing Act gives you the right to file a
         private civil lawsuit against the respondent(s) in Federal District
         Court. The time during which HUD was processing your complaint
         is not counted in the 2-year filing period. You must file your lawsuit
         at your own expense; however, if you cannot afford an attorney,
         the Court may appoint one for you.
         Even if HUD is still processing your complaint, you may file a
         private civil lawsuit against the respondent, unless (1) you have
         already signed a HUD Conciliation Agreement to resolve your
         HUD complaint; or (2) a HUD Administrative Law Judge has
         commenced an Administrative Hearing for your complaint.




                                         14
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All


Other Tools to Combat Housing Discrimination:

          •    If there is noncompliance with the order of an Administrative
               Law Judge, HUD may seek temporary relief, enforcement of
               the order or a restraining order in a United States Court of
               Appeals.
          •    The Attorney General may file a suit in Federal District Court
               if there is reasonable cause to believe a pattern or practice of
               housing discrimination is occurring.




                                         15
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All
                                              Notes




                                         16
Notes
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All




                                         17
FAIR HOUSING Equal Opportunity for All
                                              Notes




                                         18
               For Further Information

The purpose of this brochure is to summarize your right to
fair housing. The Fair Housing Act and HUD’s regulations
contain more detail and technical information. If you need
a copy of the law or regulations, contact the HUD Fair
Housing Office nearest you. See the list of HUD Fair
              Housing Offices on pages 7-10.




                CONNECT WITH HUD




Department of Housing and Urban Development
                 Room 5204
        Washington, DC 20410-2000




                                                             HUD-1686-1-FHEO
      Please visit our website: www.hud.gov/fairhousing                  2011
