                                                                                            A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE




ABOUT THE NAIC

The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) is the oldest association of state government officials.
Its members consist of the chief insurance regulators in all 50 states, the District of Columbia and five U.S. territories.
The primary responsibility of the state regulators is to protect the interests of insurance consumers, and the NAIC
helps regulators fulfill that obligation in a number of different ways. This guide is one example of work done by the
NAIC to assist states in educating and protecting consumers.

Another way the NAIC lends support to state regulators is by providing a forum for the development of uniform public
policy when uniformity is appropriate. It does this through a series of model laws, regulations and guidelines,
developed for the states’ use. States that choose to do so may adopt the models intact or modify them to meet the
needs of their marketplace and consumers.

The NAIC’s mission is to assist state insurance regulators, individually and collectively, in serving the public interest
and achieving the following fundamental insurance regulatory goals in a responsive, efficient and cost effective
manner, consistent with the wishes of its members:

     •    Protect the public interest.
     •    Promote competitive markets.
     •    Facilitate the fair and equitable treatment of insurance consumers.
     •    Promote the reliability, solvency and financial solidity of insurance institutions.
     •    Support and improve state regulation of insurance.



National Association of Insurance Commissioners
1100 Walnut Street, Suite 1500
Kansas City, MO 64106-2197
816.842.3600


www.naic.org




2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS
                                                        A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE




A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE




2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS
                                                                                          A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE




© 1993, 2006, 2010 National Association of Insurance Commissioners All rights reserved.




National Association of Insurance Commissioners Insurance Products & Services Division
phone: 816.783.8300
fax: 816.460.7593
http://store.naic.org prodserv@naic.org

Printed in the United States of America



No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any storage or retrieval system, without written
permission from the NAIC.




NAIC Executive Office                                   NAIC Central Office              NAIC Securities Valuation Office
Hall of States Bldg.                                    1100 Walnut Street, Suite 1500   One New York Plaza, Suite 4210
444 North Capitol NW, Suite 701                         Kansas City, MO 64106-2197       New York, NY 10004
Washington, DC 20001                                    816.842.3600                     212.398.9000
202.471.3990




2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS
                                                                                                                         A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE




This guide provides information on how to make decisions when you buy homeowners insurance. You have a choice
in coverages and prices will differ between insurance companies.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

WHY YOU NEED INSURANCE ............................................................................................................................... 1
COVERAGES IN A HOMEOWNERS POLICY ......................................................................................................... 1
TYPES OF HOMEOWNERS POLICIES ................................................................................................................... 2
LIMITS OF COVERAGE ........................................................................................................................................ 4
DEDUCTIBLES .................................................................................................................................................... 4
        Replacement Cost and Actual Cash Value ................................................................................................ 5
OPTIONAL COVERAGES ..................................................................................................................................... 5
BUSINESS USE OF YOUR HOME.......................................................................................................................... 5
OTHER TYPES OF HOME-RELATED INSURANCE .................................................................................................. 6
HOW INSURERS DETERMINE YOUR PREMIUM .................................................................................................. 7
SMART SHOPPING ............................................................................................................................................ 8
GETTING PREMIUM QUOTES............................................................................................................................. 9
YOUR RESPONSIBILITIES................................................................................................................................... 10
FILING A CLAIM ............................................................................................................................................... 11
LOSING YOUR INSURANCE ................................................................................................................................ 12
WHAT TO DO IF YOU CAN’T FIND INSURANCE................................................................................................... 12
FOR MORE INFORMATION .............................................................................................................................. 12




2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS
                                                        A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE




2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS
                                                                   A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE: WHY YOU NEED INSURANCE




WHY YOU NEED INSURANCE

Homeowners insurance is an important purchase for many people. There are two major reasons to buy homeowners
insurance:

To protect your assets
Homeowners insurance covers the structure of your home and your personal property, as well as your personal legal
responsibility (or liability) for injuries to others or their property while they’re on your property.

To satisfy your mortgage lender
Most mortgage lenders require you to have insurance as long as you have a mortgage and to list them as the
mortgagee on the policy. If you let your insurance lapse, your mortgage lender will likely have your home insured.
Compared to a policy you would buy on your own, the premium might be much higher and the coverage will be limited
to damage to the structure of your home. The lender can require you to pay this higher premium until you get your
own homeowners insurance again.

COVERAGES IN A HOMEOWNERS POLICY

Most homeowners insurance policies provide a package of coverages. The main types of coverage are described
below. Keep in mind that you’re covered only if the loss is caused by a peril your policy covers. For example, if your
home becomes unlivable due to an earthquake and your homeowners policy doesn’t cover earthquakes, your policy
won’t pay for loss of use of your home. Review your policy for the limits of your coverage.

     •    Dwelling. Pays for damage to your house and to structures attached to your house. This includes damage
          to fixtures, such as plumbing, electrical wiring, heating and permanently installed air-conditioning systems.
     •    Other Structures. Pays for damage to fences, tool sheds, freestanding garages, guest cottages and other
          structures not attached to your house.
     •    Personal Property. Reimburses you for the value of your possessions, including furniture, electronics,
          appliances and clothing, damaged or lost even when they aren’t on your property, such as those at an off-
          site storage locker or with your child at college.
     •    Loss of Use. Pays some of your additional living expenses while your home is being repaired.
     •    Personal Liability. Covers your financial loss if you are sued and found legally responsible for injuries or
          damages to someone else.
     •    Medical Payments. Pays medical bills for people hurt on your property or hurt by your pets.



 Peril is an insurance term for a specific risk or reason for a loss. Some policies cover all perils except ones
 specifically excluded. At the other extreme are policies that cover only the perils named in the policy.


TYPES OF HOMEOWNERS POLICIES

To be reimbursed for damage to your property, a covered peril (such as fire, theft or windstorm) must have caused
your loss. Which perils your policy covers depends on the type of policy you buy. The most common types of
homeowners policies are listed below. All of the policy types except the dwelling fire form cover your dwelling and its
contents, as well as personal liability and medical payments. Read Table 1 to learn the specific perils each type of
policy covers.




2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS                                                                             1
                                                                            A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE: TYPES OF POLICIES




 A type of homeowners policy is called Form


     •    The Dwelling Fire Form covers only your dwelling. It does not cover your personal property, personal
          liability or medical payments. It also covers only a few perils. It’s the type of policy your mortgage lender will
          buy for you if you let your homeowners policy lapse. It’s also used for vacation homes and when you can’t
          find other coverage.
     •    The Basic Form insures your property against only the list of perils shown in Table 1.
     •    The Modified Coverage Form is for older homes, where the cost to rebuild is greater than the market value.
          It covers the same set of perils as the Basic Form.
     •    The Broad Form insures your property against the perils shown on Table 1.
     •    The Special Form is the most popular of all homeowners forms. It insures your property against all perils,
          except those the policy specifically names as not covered. Perils commonly excluded are flood and
          earthquake.
     •    The Tenants Form is for renters. It insures your personal property against all of the perils in the Broad Form.
     •    The Condominium Unit Owners Form is for owner-occupants of condominium units. It insures your personal
          property and your walls, floors and ceiling against all of the perils in the Broad Form.

There are other types of insurance for other types of residences. If you own a townhouse, you may insure it through
either an individual homeowners policy or an association master policy. If you live in a mobile home that has wheels
and doesn’t rest on blocks or a permanent foundation, in most states you’ll buy a form of automobile insurance. This
insurance offers far less coverage than homeowners policies. If your home is on land used for farming or raising
livestock, ask about a farmowners policy.




2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS                                                                                 2
                                                                       A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE: TYPES OF POLICIES




 Flood Insurance
 Homeowners policies don’t cover flood damage. Depending on where your home is, you may qualify for flood
 insurance through the National Flood Insurance Program or through a private insurer. Contact an insurance
 agent for more information. If your home is in a flood plain, your mortgage lender will usually require you to
 buy flood insurance.




2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS                                                                            3
                                                                       A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE: LIMITS/DEDUCTIBLES




LIMITS OF COVERAGE

Your insurance agent usually will help you decide how much dwelling coverage to buy when you first get homeowners
insurance. Your coverage should equal the full replacement cost of your home. Note that replacement cost and
market value are not the same. The market value, which includes the price of your land, depends on the real estate
market.

You should review your dwelling coverage from time to time to be sure it doesn’t drop below the cost to replace
your home. If it drops below 80% of the full replacement cost of your home, your insurance company may reduce
the amount that it will pay on a claim.

The limits of your coverage for other structures, for personal property and for loss of use of your home are expressed
as percentages of your dwelling limit. The coverage is usually a set percentage (see Table 2). For example, if your
dwelling coverage limit is $150,000 and your coverage for personal property is limited to 50% of your dwelling
coverage, your coverage for personal property would be $75,000. Check your policy, as coverage limits might be based
on percentages different from those in Table 2. You choose your coverage limits for your personal liability and for
medical payments.

Table 2. Policy Limits

  Coverage Component                                      Typical Limit of Coverage

  Dwelling                                                You Choose
  Other Structures                                        10% of Dwelling Coverage Limit

  Personal Property                                       50% of Dwelling Coverage Limit
  Loss of Use                                             20% of Dwelling Coverage Limit

  Personal Liability                                      You Choose
  Medical Payments                                        You Choose


DEDUCTIBLES

A deductible is the money you have to pay out-of-pocket on a claim before the policy pays the loss. The deductible
applies to coverage for your home and personal property and is paid on each claim. Higher policy deductibles mean
lower policy premiums. A policy with a $1,000 deductible will have a lower premium than the same policy with a $500
deductible. In some locations, there are also catastrophe deductibles, which are expressed as a percentage instead
of a dollar amount.

Having a higher deductible can be a good way to save money on your homeowners insurance premium and to submit
fewer claims. However, be sure you can afford the deductible in case you have a loss.


 Replacement Cost and Actual Cash Value
 You can choose to insure your home and its contents for either replacement cost or actual cash value.
 Replacement cost is the cost to rebuild your home or repair damages using materials of similar kind and quality.


2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS                                                                             4
                                                                         A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE: OPTIONAL COVERAGES




    Actual cash value is the value of your home considering its age and wear and tear. Actual cash value coverage
    pays you for your loss, but often doesn’t pay enough to fully repair or replace the damage.

OPTIONAL COVERAGES

You can add other coverages. Sometimes, you can add coverage by buying an endorsement; other times, you must
buy another policy to cover a specific peril or a specific item of property. Some reasons you might want to add
coverages are:

•      To cover perils most homeowners policies don’t cover. The National Flood Insurance Program writes most flood
       insurance policies, although some insurance companies also sell it. Many insurance companies sell earthquake
       insurance as a separate policy or as an endorsement to your homeowners policy. While homeowners policies in
       most states cover damage caused by windstorm and hail, policies in coastal areas often exclude this coverage, in
       which case you would need to buy a separate policy to protect from this risk. You might be able to buy
       endorsements to cover damage caused by mold or by sewer or drain backups and sump pump overflow since
       most homeowners policies offer limited or no coverage for these types of events.

•      To increase your current coverage. Guaranteed replacement cost coverage pays to completely rebuild your
       home, while a personal property replacement cost endorsement pays to replace your personal property. An
       inflation guard endorsement raises your dwelling coverage limit annually in line with inflation. Personal umbrella
       liability insurance increases your liability coverage above the level available in a homeowners policy. A scheduled
       personal property endorsement (or “personal article floater”) covers jewelry, furs, stamps, coins, guns,
       computers, antiques and other items whose value might be greater than the normal limits in your
       homeowners policy. An ordinance or law endorsement pays for the extra expense to rebuild your home in
       compliance with building codes and other ordinances or laws that didn’t exist when your home was originally
       built.

BUSINESS USE OF YOUR HOME

While homeowners insurance isn’t designed to cover most business uses of your home, some policies might cover
some business uses, at least partially. For example:

•      Computers and laptops. If you use your home computer or laptop for business purposes, it’s often covered,
       but you should check your policy limits. Your laptop might be covered, even if it’s lost, damaged or stolen
       when it’s away from your home.

•      Daycare coverage. Most homeowners policies provide a limited amount of liability coverage if you care for a
       friend’s children and aren’t paid. But if you’re paid to provide daycare in your home, you must buy more
       insurance to cover your related liability.

OTHER TYPES OF HOME-RELATED INSURANCE

You might hear about other types of insurance, especially when you buy your home. Lenders usually require private
mortgage insurance (PMI) if your down payment is less than 20% of the home’s purchase price. PMI protects the
lender if you default on your mortgage. The PMI premium is often included in your monthly mortgage payment.



2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS                                                                               5
                                                             A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE: OTHER HOME-RELATED INSURANCE




Title insurance protects you and the lender against any monetary loss due to errors in the title. You usually pay for
title insurance as a one-time fee when you buy a home.

A home warranty covers the mechanical breakdown of individual parts of a home, such as the electrical and plumbing
systems. A warranty doesn’t cover the home’s structure, may or may not cover appliances, ends at a specific point in
time (for example, one year) and has exclusions and limitations that you should review. Home warranties might not
be regulated as insurance in your state.




2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS                                                                             6
                                                                 A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE: DETERMINING YOUR PREMIUM




HOW INSURERS DETERMINE YOUR PREMIUM

Many factors affect the premium you pay, including which insurance company you choose. Different insurance
companies charge different premiums for similar coverage. Decisions you make about how much insurance coverage
to buy also affect your premium. Some of the other things that are likely to affect your premium are:

The characteristics of your home

     •    The cost to rebuild your home. This is not the same as the purchase price (which includes the cost of the
          land). Your insurance agent might help you estimate replacement cost using information about your home
          and its contents.
     •    Whether your home is made of brick or wood. The premium usually is lower for homes that are primarily
          brick or masonry than for wood frame homes.
     •    The distance from your home to a water source or fire department and the quality of your community’s fire
          protection services.
     •    The age and condition of your home. The premium often is higher for older homes and homes in poor
          condition than for newer homes and homes in good condition.
     •    The claims history of your home and of homes in your area.

Your choices and characteristics

     •    The coverages you choose, including optional endorsements.
     •    The deductible you choose.
     •    Insuring your home and autos with the same insurance company.
     •    The length of time you’ve been with your current insurance company.
     •    Your credit history. To access your credit report, the insurance agent might ask you for your Social Security
          number. In many states, insurers use your credit history as a factor to decide whether to sell you insurance
          and what price to charge you.
     •    Your history of filing claims for water damage, fire, theft or liability on homes you’ve owned.

Other characteristics

     •    Having protection devices in your home, such as smoke detectors, a burglar alarm, a sprinkler system,
          deadbolts on doors or security devices for windows. Many insurers offer a discount if you have any of these.
     •    Having a wood furnace or wood stove.
     •    Having a swimming pool, trampoline or playscape that could cause injuries.
     •    The types of pets you have. Some insurers won’t insure you if you own certain breeds of dogs.
     •    Operating a business from your home.




2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS                                                                             7
                                                                          A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE: SMART SHOPPING




SMART SHOPPING

Different insurance companies charge different rates for the same coverage. Also, not all insurance companies
provide the same level of claims service. Therefore, it makes sense to shop around for the best insurance company
for your needs.

Insurance companies use one of three methods to sell their products.

     •    Independent agents represent several companies and can give you several quotes.
     •    Exclusive agents only sell the products of one insurance company.
     •    Direct market sales are over the Internet or by mail or telephone.

You can find insurance companies and agents through the phone book, on the Internet and television and by asking
friends and neighbors. You should also check with your state insurance department to see if it publishes premium
comparison guides for homeowners insurance.

Customer service is important to most consumers, particularly when they have a claim. You can get a sense of how well
an insurer serves its customers from a complaint index. Many state insurance departments post complaint index
information on their Web sites. A complaint index measures how many complaints your state insurance department
receives relative to the size of the company.

It’s illegal for unlicensed insurers or agents to sell insurance. Business cards aren’t proof that an agent is
licensed. If you do business with an unlicensed agent or company, it might not pay your claims or refund your
premiums if you cancel your policy. If an unlicensed agent or company contacts you, check with your state
insurance department immediately, so it can investigate. Your actions may protect someone else from being
victimized.

You also want to buy insurance from a company that’s financially sound. You can check the financial health of an
insurance company by using ratings from independent ratings agencies such as Standard and Poor’s, A.M. Best and
Moody’s.




2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS                                                                            8
                                                                  A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE: GETTING PREMIUM QUOTES




GETTING PREMIUM QUOTES

Getting premium quotes is a good way to compare different companies’ prices. But, first you should decide what
coverages and policy limits you need. It’s important that you know how much it would cost to rebuild your home. An
insurance agent or a contractor might be able to help you estimate the cost to rebuild your home.

When you get quotes, it’s crucial that you ask for the same coverages and limits and give the same information to
each agent or company. To give you an accurate quote, the insurance agent or company will usually ask for a
description of your house (such as where it’s located, its square footage, when it was built and the type of
construction). He or she also might ask about items that increase your insurance needs, such as owning pets and
expensive possessions. An agent might visit your home to take a photo or ask you for other information (such as the
distance from the nearest fire department and the general condition of your home). Be sure to get rate quotes and key
information in writing.

Make sure you ask the insurance agent if you qualify for any discounts. Some insurers offer a discount if you also buy
your auto insurance from them or if you disaster-proof your home (for example, add storm shutters), update the
home’s electrical or plumbing systems, get a new roof or add home security devices (for example, a burglar alarm).

Also, be sure to find out how much your premium will change if you choose different deductibles.

While you’re getting quotes, you should also ask the agent some of these questions:

     •    Are the agent and the insurance company licensed by my state insurance department? For how long? (Your
          state insurance department can confirm the answers to these questions.)
     •    How can I find out the claims history of the home before I buy it? The claims history of the home might
          affect your premium.
     •    If I submit a claim, how will it affect my premium when I renew the policy?
     •    How will my credit history affect my premium?
     •    What does the policy cover? What doesn’t it cover? What are the limits to the coverages?
     •    How much coverage do I need for my personal property?
     •    How much liability coverage should I buy?
     •    Should I buy flood insurance or earthquake coverage? Your homeowners insurance policy doesn’t
          cover either.
     •    What types of water damage are not covered? Is mold damage covered?

If you’re thinking of buying a home, you can ask an agent to estimate the cost of insurance.




2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS                                                                            9
                                                                     A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE: YOUR RESPONSIBILITIES




YOUR RESPONSIBILITIES

A homeowners insurance policy is a legal contract. It’s written so that your rights and responsibilities, and those of
the insurance company, are clearly stated. You should read your policy and be sure you understand it. If you have
questions about your insurance policy, contact your insurance agent or company.

When you buy homeowners insurance, you will receive a policy—not a photocopy. If you don’t receive a policy within
30 days, contact the insurance company, not the agent. If you need a company’s toll-free number, contact your state
insurance department.

Keep your policy in a safe place and know the name of your insurer. If you still have questions, contact your state
insurance department.

Other helpful tips:

     •    Pay the premium on time. Most insurers don’t offer a grace period for paying the premium; the due date is
          the due date.
     •    Keep a file of all paperwork you completed online or received in the mail and signed—as well as any other
          documents related to your insurance, including the policy, correspondence, copies of advertisements,
          premium payment receipts, notes of conversations and any claims submitted.
     •    Make a household inventory.
          o Go through each room; write down and take pictures or videos of everything in the room.
          o Inventory everything, including valuable items such as antiques, electronics, jewelry, collectibles and
             guns.
          o Store your home inventory in a secure place at another location, such as your workplace, a safe deposit
             box, a relative’s house or online.
          o Annually review and update your home inventory, including your pictures/videos. Also update
             your inventory when you buy new items.
          o Keep receipts with your home inventory for all repairs and new items you buy, for proof if you file a
             claim.
     •    Maintain your home.
          o A homeowners policy isn’t a maintenance contract; it insures against damage from perils such as fire,
             wind and hail. It doesn’t pay to repair items that simply wear out, like rotted porch railings. You’re
             responsible for the upkeep of your home, such as repairing your roof when it begins to leak or cleaning
             your chimney flue so it doesn’t catch fire.




2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS                                                                          10
                                                                           A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE: FILING A CLAIM




FILING A CLAIM

Read your policy—it’s your guide to the types of losses that may or may not be covered. How often you file a claim and
the types of claims you file often affect your premium and whether your insurer will renew your policy. If the cost to
repair the damage is not much more than your deductible, you might want to pay for the repairs without filing a claim.


 Most insurance companies report your homeowners claims to private nationwide claim databases (such as the
 Comprehensive Loss Underwriting Exchange, better known as CLUE). Insurance companies use these databases
 to see the claims you’ve submitted in the past.


To file a claim, contact your insurance agent or company as soon as possible. Ask about forms or documents you’ll need
to support your claim. You’re also required to protect your home from further damage. For example, you might need
to board it up or clean up water from a backed-up drain.

The insurance company will assign a claims adjuster to assess the damages and determine the payment. These
adjusters may be employees of the company or independent contractors. You should cooperate with the adjuster’s
investigation of your claim. The adjuster will probably want to meet with you at your house to inspect the damage.
Jot down notes and keep track of the dates of any conversations you have with your insurance agent or adjuster.

If there are disagreements between you, the insurer and the claims adjuster, first try to resolve them with your
insurer. Don’t feel rushed or pushed to agree with something you aren’t comfortable with. It might help to have
your contractor meet with you and the insurance adjuster.

If you and the insurer still disagree about the value of the claim, check your policy for an appraisal clause. Another
option is to hire an attorney or a public adjuster.


 Public adjusters aren’t attorneys or government employees – they’re freelance adjusters that charge you a fee.
 Not all states allow public adjusters, but those that do require them to be licensed and to follow certain
 guidelines. If you have questions about the use public adjusted, contact your state insurance department.


If you have trouble with or questions about your claim, you also may contact your state insurance department for help.
Your state insurance department has consumer services personnel who can help you work with your insurer to
resolve disagreements.




2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS                                                                         11
                                                                      A CONSUMER’S GUIDE TO HOME INSURANCE: LOSING YOUR INSURANCE




LOSING YOUR INSURANCE

There’s a big difference between an insurance company cancelling your policy and not renewing it.

Cancellation means either you or your insurance company stop the coverage before the policy’s normal expiration
date (which is usually 12 months after the policy starts). You can always cancel your policy for any reason. When
you’re a new policyholder, there’s a limited period of time (typically 60 days) in which your insurance company can
cancel your policy for any reason. After that, it can only cancel you if you don’t pay your premium, if you’ve lied on your
application or if your risk has changed substantially.

If your insurance company cancels your policy, it must give you notice. The number of days varies by state. If you or the
insurer cancels your policy, the company may refund a portion of your premium.

Non-renewal means the company refuses to renew your policy after it expires. Insurance companies generally have
the right to not renew your policy. If your company chooses not to renew your policy, it must give you notice; the number
of days (typically 30 days before the renewal date) varies by state. You may ask the insurer for the reason. You also may
choose not to renew your policy.

WHAT TO DO IF YOU CAN’T FIND INSURANCE

Contact your state insurance department to see if your state has a FAIR Plan, wind pool, or other residual market
mechanism information or market assistance program available. See below for information on contacting your
insurance department.

FOR MORE INFORMATION

     •    If you can’t find insurance, consumer rights information, premium comparisons or complaint handling
          information, visit your state insurance department’s Web site. The department will have some information
          posted on the Web site, plus contact information if you have other questions. To find the Web site address
          of your state department, visit the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) Web site at
          www.naic.org/state_web_map.htm and select your state on the map.
     •    Visit the NAIC Web sites for consumers: www.InsureUonline.org or www.naic.org.
     •    Visit the National Flood Insurance Program Web site: www.floodsmart.gov.
     •    Access your free annual credit report through www.annualcreditreport.com or call 877.322.8228.




2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS                                                                           12
2022 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS
