 Contract Concerning     PROMULGATED BY THE TEXAS REAL ESTATE COMMISSION
                                                                      Page(TREC)
                                                                            of 10                                         11-04-2024[11-
 07-2022]
                                                NEW    HOME CONTRACT
                                                  (Address of Property)
                                                      (Incomplete Construction)
                       NOTICE: Not For Use For Condominium Transactions or Closings Prior to Completion of Construction
                                                                                                                           EQUAL HOUSING
                                                                                                                            OPPORTUNITY

  1.PARTIES: The parties to this contract are
    (Seller) and                                                               (Buyer). Seller agrees to sell and
    convey to Buyer and Buyer agrees to buy from Seller the Property defined below.
  2.PROPERTY:Lot                      ,Block                   ,
    Addition, City of                                         ,County of                                Texas, known as
                                                                                             (address/zip code), or as
    described on attached exhibit, together with: (i) improvements, fixtures and all other property
    described in the Construction Documents; and (ii) all rights, privileges and appurtenances thereto
    All property sold by this contract is called the Property (Property).
    RESERVATIONS: Any reservation for oil, gas, or other minerals, water, timber, or other interests
    is made in accordance with an attached addendum.
  3.SALES PRICE:
    A. Cash portion of Sales Price payable by Buyer at closing ....................... $
       The term “Cash portion of the Sales Price” does not include proceeds from borrowing of any
       kind or selling other real property except as disclosed in this contract.
    B. Sum of all financing described in the attached: q Third Party Financing Addendum,
       q Loan Assumption Addendum, q Seller Financing Addendum ....... $
    C. Sales Price (Sum of A and B) ............................................................ $
  4.LEASES:
    A. Except as disclosed in this contract, Seller is not aware of any leases affecting the Property.
       After the Effective Date, Seller may not, without Buyer's written consent, create a new lease,
       amend any existing lease, or convey any interest in the Property.




                                             T
    B. NATURAL RESOURCE LEASES: “Natural Resource Lease” means an existing oil and gas,
       mineral, geothermal, water, wind, or other natural resource lease affecting the Property to
       which Seller is a party. Seller q is q is not a party to a Natural Resource Lease. If Seller is a
       party to a Natural Resource Lease, check one of the following:
                                          AF
    q (1) Seller has delivered to Buyer a copy of all the Natural Resource Leases.
    q (2) Seller has not delivered to Buyer a copy of all the Natural Resource Leases. Seller shall
           provide to Buyer a copy of all the Natural Resource Leases within 3 days after the Effective
           Date. Buyer may terminate the contract within                       days after the date the Buyer
           receives all the Natural Resource Leases and the earnest money shall be refunded to
           Buyer.
  5.EARNEST MONEY AND TERMINATION OPTION:
    A. DELIVERY OF EARNEST MONEY AND OPTION FEE: Within 3 days after the Effective Date, Buyer
                             R
       must deliver to                                                          (Escrow Agent) at
                                                                (address): $                                as   earnest
       money and $                        as the Option Fee. The earnest money and Option Fee shall be
       made payable to Escrow Agent and may be paid separately or combined in a single payment.
       (1) Buyer shall deliver additional earnest money of $                                      to Escrow Agent within
                D

                   days after the Effective Date of this contract.
       (2) If the last day to deliver the earnest money, Option Fee, or the additional earnest money
           falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the time to deliver the earnest money, Option
           Fee, or the additional earnest money, as applicable, is extended until the end of the next
           day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
       (3) The amount(s) Escrow Agent receives under this paragraph shall be applied first to the
           Option Fee, then to the earnest money, and then to the additional earnest money.
       (4) Buyer authorizes Escrow Agent to release and deliver the Option Fee to Seller at any time
           without further notice to or consent from Buyer, and releases Escrow Agent from liability for
           delivery of the Option Fee to Seller. The Option Fee will be credited to the Sales Price at
           closing.
    B. TERMINATION OPTION: For nominal consideration, the receipt of which Seller acknowledges,
       and Buyer's agreement to pay the Option Fee within the time required, Seller grants Buyer the
       unrestricted right to terminate this contract by giving notice of termination to Seller within
                 days after the Effective Date of this contract (Option Period). Notices under this
       paragraph must be given by 5:00 p.m. (local time where the Property is located) by the date
       specified. If Buyer gives notice of termination within the time prescribed: (i) the Option Fee
       will not be refunded and Escrow Agent shall release any Option Fee remaining with Escrow
       Agent to Seller; and (ii) any earnest money will be refunded to Buyer.
    C. FAILURE TO TIMELY DELIVER EARNEST MONEY: If Buyer fails to deliver the earnest money
       within the time required, Seller may terminate this contract or exercise Seller’s remedies under
       Paragraph 15, or both, by providing notice to Buyer before Buyer delivers the earnest money.
    D. FAILURE TO TIMELY DELIVER OPTION FEE: If no dollar amount is stated as the Option Fee or if
       Buyer fails to deliver the Option Fee within the time required, Buyer shall not have the
       unrestricted right to terminate this contract under this Paragraph 5.
    E. TIME: Time is of the essence for this paragraph and strict compliance with the time
       for performance is required.
Initialed for identification by Buyer                           and Seller                                      TREC NO. 23-19[18]
 Contract Concerning                                                            Page 2 of 10    11-04-2024
 [11-07-2022]                              (Address of Property)

  6.TITLE POLICY AND SURVEY:
    A. TITLE POLICY: Seller shall furnish to Buyer at qSeller’s qBuyer’s expense an owner policy of
       title insurance (Title Policy) issued by                                        (Title Company) in
       the amount of the Sales Price, dated at or after closing, insuring Buyer against loss under the
       provisions of the Title Policy, subject to the promulgated exclusions (including existing building
       and zoning ordinances) and the following exceptions:
       (1) Restrictive covenants common to the platted subdivision in which the Property is located.
       (2) The standard printed exception for standby fees, taxes and assessments.
       (3) Liens created as part of the financing described in Paragraph 3.
       (4) Utility easements created by the dedication deed or plat of the subdivision in which the
            Property is located.
       (5) Reservations or exceptions otherwise permitted by this contract or as may be approved by
            Buyer in writing.
       (6)The standard printed exception as to marital rights.
       (7) The standard printed exception as to waters, tidelands, beaches, streams, and related
            matters.
       (8) The standard printed exception as to discrepancies, conflicts, shortages in area or boundary
            lines, encroachments or protrusions, or overlapping improvements:
       q (i) will not be amended or deleted from the title policy; or
       q (ii) will be amended to read, "shortages in area" at the expense of qBuyer qSeller.
       (9) The exception or exclusion regarding minerals approved by the Texas Department of
            Insurance.
    B. COMMITMENT: Within 20 days after the Title Company receives a copy of this contract, Seller
       shall furnish to Buyer a commitment for title insurance (Commitment) and, at Buyer's expense,
       legible copies of restrictive covenants and documents evidencing exceptions                 in   the
       Commitment (Exception Documents) other than the standard printed exceptions. Seller




                                           T
       authorizes the Title Company to deliver the Commitment and Exception Documents to Buyer at
       Buyer's address shown in Paragraph 21. If the Commitment and Exception Documents are not
       delivered to Buyer within the specified time, the time for delivery will be automatically extended
       up to 15 days or 3 days before the Closing Date, whichever is earlier. If the Commitment and
                                        AF
       Exception Documents are not delivered within the time required, Buyer may terminate this
       contract and the earnest money will be refunded to Buyer.
    C. SURVEY: The survey must be made after the Substantial Completion Date by a registered
       professional land surveyor acceptable to the Title Company and Buyer’s lender(s).
       (Check one box only)
    q (1) At least             days prior to the Closing Date, Seller, at Seller’s expense, shall provide a
            new survey to Buyer.
    q (2) At least           days prior to the Closing Date, Buyer, at Buyer’s expense, may [shall] obtain
            a new survey. Buyer is deemed to receive the survey on the date of actual receipt or the
                          R
            date specified in this paragraph, whichever is earlier. If Buyer fails to obtain the survey,
            Buyer may not terminate the contract under Paragraph 2B of the Third Party Financing
            Addendum because the survey was not obtained.
    D. OBJECTIONS: Buyer may object in writing to defects, exceptions, or encumbrances to title:
       disclosed on the survey other than items 6A(1) through (7) above; disclosed in the Commitment
                D

       other than items 6A(1) through (9) above; or which prohibit the following use or activity:
                                                                                                          .
       Buyer must object the earlier of (i) the Closing Date or (ii)        days after Buyer receives the
       Commitment, Exception Documents, and the survey. Buyer’s failure to object within the time
       allowed will constitute a waiver of Buyer’s right to object; except that the requirements in
       Schedule C of the Commitment are not waived by Buyer. Provided Seller is not obligated to
       incur any expense, Seller shall cure any timely objections of Buyer or any third party lender
       within 15 days after Seller receives the objections (Cure Period) and the Closing Date will be
       extended as necessary. If objections are not cured within the Cure Period, Buyer may, by
       delivering notice to Seller within 5 days after the end of the Cure Period: (i) terminate this
       contract and the earnest money will be refunded to Buyer; or (ii) waive the objections. If Buyer
       does not terminate within the time required, Buyer shall be deemed to have waived the
       objections. If the Commitment or survey is revised or any new Exception Document(s) is
       delivered, Buyer may object to any new matter revealed in the revised Commitment or survey
       or new Exception Document(s) within the same time stated in this paragraph to make objections
       beginning when the revised Commitment, survey, or Exception Document(s) is delivered to
       Buyer.
    E. TITLE NOTICES:
       (1) ABSTRACT OR TITLE POLICY: Broker advises Buyer to have an abstract of title covering the
            Property examined by an attorney of Buyer’s selection, or Buyer should be furnished with or
            obtain a Title Policy. If a Title Policy is furnished, the Commitment should be promptly
            reviewed by an attorney of Buyer’s choice due to the time limitations on Buyer’s right to
            object.
       (2) MEMBERSHIP IN PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION(S): The Property qis qis not subject to
            mandatory membership in a property owners association(s). If the Property is subject to
            mandatory membership in a property owners association(s), Seller notifies Buyer under
            §5.012, Texas Property Code, that, as a purchaser of property in the residential community
Initialed for identification by Buyer               and Seller                           TREC NO. 23-19[18]
 Contract Concerning                                                             Page 3 of 10    11-04-2024
 [11-07-2022]                              (Address of Property)

         identified in Paragraph 2A in which the Property is located, you are obligated to be a member
         of the property owners association(s). Restrictive covenants governing the use and occupancy
         of the Property and all dedicatory instruments governing the establishment, maintenance, and
         operation of this residential community have been or will be recorded in the Real Property
         Records of the county in which the Property is located. Copies of the restrictive covenants and
         dedicatory instruments may be obtained from the county clerk. You are obligated to pay
         assessments to the property owners association(s). The amount of the assessments
         is subject to change. Your failure to pay the assessments could result in
         enforcement of the association’s lien on and the foreclosure of the Property.
         Section 207.003, Property Code, entitles an owner to receive copies of any document that
         governs the establishment, maintenance, or operation of a subdivision, including, but not
         limited to, restrictions, bylaws, rules and regulations, and a resale certificate from a property
         owners' association. A resale certificate contains information including, but not limited to,
         statements specifying the amount and frequency of regular assessments and the style and
         cause number of lawsuits to which the property owners' association is a party, other than
         lawsuits relating to unpaid ad valorem taxes of an individual member of the association.
         These documents must be made available to you by the property owners' association or the
         association's agent on your request.
         If Buyer is concerned about these matters, the TREC promulgated Addendum for
         Property Subject to Mandatory Membership in a Property Owners Association should
         be used.
     (3) STATUTORY TAX DISTRICTS: If the Property is situated in a utility or other statutorily created
         district providing water, sewer, drainage, or flood control facilities and services, Chapter 49,
         Texas Water Code, requires Seller to deliver and Buyer to sign the statutory notice relating to
         the tax rate, bonded indebtedness, or standby fee of the district prior to final execution of this
         contract.




                                           T
     (4) TIDE WATERS: If the Property abuts the tidally influenced waters of the state, §33.135,
         Texas Natural Resources Code, requires a notice regarding coastal area property to be
         included in the contract. [An addendum containing the notice promulgated by TREC or
         required by the parties must be used.]
                                        AF
     (5) ANNEXATION: If the Property is located outside the limits of a municipality, Seller notifies
         Buyer under §5.011, Texas Property Code, that the Property may now or later be included in
         the extraterritorial jurisdiction of a municipality and may now or later be subject to annexation
         by the municipality. Each municipality maintains a map that depicts its boundaries and
         extraterritorial jurisdiction. To determine if the Property is located within a municipality's
         extraterritorial jurisdiction or is likely to be located within a municipality’s extraterritorial
         jurisdiction, contact all municipalities located in the general proximity of the Property for
         further information.
     (6) PROPERTY LOCATED IN A CERTIFICATED SERVICE AREA OF A UTILITY SERVICE PROVIDER:
         Notice required by §13.257, Water Code: The real property, described in Paragraph 2, that
                          R
         you are about to purchase may be located in a certificated water or sewer service area, which
         is authorized by law to provide water or sewer service to the properties in the certificated
         area. If your property is located in a certificated area there may be special costs or charges
         that you will be required to pay before you can receive water or sewer service. There may
         be a period required to construct lines or other
                D

         facilities necessary to provide water or sewer service to your property. You are advised to
         determine if the property is in a certificated area and contact the utility service provider to
         determine the cost that you will be required to pay and the period, if any, that is required to
         provide water or sewer service to your property. The undersigned Buyer hereby acknowledges
         receipt of the foregoing notice at or before the execution of a binding contract for the
         purchase of the real property described in Paragraph 2 or at closing of purchase of the real
         property.
     (7) PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS: If the Property is in a public improvement district, Seller
         must give Buyer written notice as required by §5.014, Property Code. [An addendum
         containing the required notice shall be attached to this contract.]
     (8) TRANSFER FEES: If the Property is subject to a private transfer fee obligation, §5.205,
         Property Code, requires Seller to notify Buyer as follows: The private transfer fee obligation
         may be governed by Chapter 5, Subchapter G of the Texas Property Code.
     (9) PROPANE GAS SYSTEM SERVICE AREA: If the Property is located in a propane gas system
         service area owned by a distribution system retailer, Seller must give Buyer written notice as
         required by §141.010, Texas Utilities Code. [An addendum containing the notice approved by
         TREC or required by the parties should be used.]
    (10) NOTICE OF WATER LEVEL FLUCTUATIONS: If the Property adjoins an impoundment of water,
         including a reservoir or lake, constructed and maintained under Chapter 11, Water Code, that
         has a storage capacity of at least 5,000 acre-feet at the impoundment’s normal operating
         level, Seller hereby notifies Buyer: “The water level of the impoundment of water adjoining
         the Property fluctuates for various reasons, including as a result of: (1) an entity lawfully
         exercising its right to use the water stored in the impoundment; or (2) drought or flood
         conditions.”
    (11) CERTIFICATE OF MOLD REMEDIATION: If the Property has been remediated for mold,
         Seller must provide to Buyer each certificate of mold damage remediation issued under
         §1958.154, Occupations Code, during the 5 years preceding the sale of the Property.
Initialed for identification by Buyer               and Seller                            TREC NO. 23-19[18]
 Contract Concerning                                                             Page 4 of 10     11-04-2024
 [11-07-2022]                               (Address of Property)
 (12)[(11)]REQUIRED NOTICES: The following notices have been given or are attached to this contract
       (for example, utility, water, drainage, and public improvement districts [MUD, WCID, PID
       notices]):                                                                                        .
       Seller’s failure to provide applicable statutory notices may provide Buyer with remedies or rights
       to terminate the contract.
  7.PROPERTY CONDITION:
    A. ACCESS AND INSPECTIONS: Seller shall permit Buyer and Buyer’s agents access to the Property
       at reasonable times. Buyer may have the Property inspected by inspectors selected by Buyer
       and licensed by TREC or otherwise permitted by law to make inspections.
    B. CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS: Seller shall complete all improvements to the Property with due
       diligence in accordance with the Construction Documents. “Construction Documents” means the
       plans and specifications, the finish out schedules, any change orders, and any allowances related
       to the plans and specifications, finish out schedules, and change orders. The Construction
       Documents have been signed by the parties and are incorporated into this contract by reference.
    C. COST ADJUSTMENTS: All change orders must be in writing. Increase in costs resulting from
       change orders or items selected by Buyer which exceed the allowances specified in the
       Construction Documents will be paid by Buyer as follows:
                                                                                                           .
       A decrease in costs resulting from change orders and unused allowances will reduce the Sales
       Price, with proportionate adjustments to the amounts in Paragraphs 3A and 3B as required by
       lender.
   D. BUYER’S SELECTIONS: If the Construction Documents permit selections by Buyer, Buyer’s
       selections will conform to Seller’s normal standards as set out in the Construction Documents or
       will not, in Seller’s judgment, adversely affect the marketability of the Property. Buyer will make
       required selections within            days after notice from Seller.
   E. COMPLETION: Seller must commence construction no later than                   days after the Effective




                                           T
       Date of this contract. The improvements will be substantially completed in accordance with the
       Construction Documents and ready for occupancy not later than                                       ,
       20       . The improvements will be deemed to be substantially completed in accordance with the
       Construction Documents upon the final inspection and approval by all applicable governmental
                                        AF
       authorities and any lender (Substantial Completion Date). Construction delays caused by acts of
       God, fire or other casualty, strikes, boycotts or nonavailability of materials for which no
       substitute of comparable quality and price is available will be added to the time allowed for
       substantial completion of the construction. However, in no event may the time for substantial
       completion extend beyond the Closing Date. Seller may substitute materials, equipment and
       appliances of comparable quality for those specified in the Construction Documents.
   F. WARRANTIES: Except as expressly set forth in this contract, a separate writing, or provided by
       law, Seller makes no other express warranties. Seller shall assign to Buyer at closing all
       assignable manufacturer warranties.
                          R
   G. INSULATION: As required by Federal Trade Commission Regulations, the information relating to
       the insulation installed or to be installed in the Improvements at the Property is: (check only one
       box below)
   q (1) as shown in the attached specifications.
   q (2) as follows:
                D

            (a) Exterior walls of improved living areas: insulated with
                insulation to a thickness of            inches which yields an R-Value of
                                                                                                         .
            (b) Walls in other areas of the home: insulated with
                insulation to a thickness of            inches which yields an R-Value of
                                                                                                         .
            (c) Ceilings in improved living areas: insulated with
                insulation to a thickness of            inches which yields an R-Value of
                                                                                                         .
            (d) Floors of improved living areas not applied to a slab foundation: insulated with
                                                        insulation to a thickness of                inches
                which yields an R-Value of                                                               .
            (e) Other insulated areas: insulated with                                      insulation to a
                thickness of            inches which yields an R-Value of                                .
            All stated R-Values are based on information provided by the manufacturer of the insulation.
   H. ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS: Buyer is advised that the presence of wetlands, toxic substances,
       including asbestos and wastes or other environmental hazards, or the presence of a threatened
       or endangered species or its habitat may affect Buyer’s intended use of the Property. If Buyer is
       concerned about these matters, an addendum promulgated by TREC or required by the parties
       should be used.
   I. SELLER’S DISCLOSURE:
      (1) Seller q is q is not aware of any flooding of the Property which has had a material
            adverse effect on the use of the Property.
      (2) Seller q is q is not aware of any pending or threatened litigation, condemnation, or
            special assessment affecting the Property.
      (3) Seller q is q is not aware of any environmental hazards that materially and adversely
            affect the Property.
      (4) Seller q is q is not aware of any dumpsite, landfill, or underground tanks or containers
            now or previously located on the Property.
Initialed for identification by Buyer                and Seller                           TREC NO. 23-19[18]
 Contract Concerning                                                               Page 5 of 10     11-04-2024
 [11-07-2022]                                (Address of Property)
      (5) Seller q is q is not aware of any wetlands, as defined by federal or state law or
          regulation, affecting the Property.
      (6) Seller q is q is not aware of any threatened or endangered species or their habitat
          affecting the Property.
      (7) Seller q is q is not aware that the Property is located q wholly q partly in a floodplain.
      (8) Seller q is q is not aware that a tree or trees located on the Property has oak wilt.
      If Seller is aware of any of the items above, explain (attach additional sheets if necessary):
      __________________________________________________________________________                              .
    J. RESIDENTIAL SERVICE CONTRACTS: Buyer may purchase a residential service contract from a
       provider or administrator licensed by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation. If
       Buyer purchases a residential service contract, Seller shall reimburse Buyer at closing for the
       cost of the residential service contract in an amount not exceeding $                           . Buyer
       should review any residential service contract for the scope of coverage, exclusions and
       limitations. The purchase of a residential service contract is optional. Similar coverage
       may be purchased from various companies authorized to do business in Texas.
   8.BROKERS AND SALES AGENTS:
    A. BROKER OR SALES AGENT DISCLOSURE: Texas law requires a real estate broker or sales agent
       who is a party to a transaction or acting on behalf of a spouse, parent, child, business entity in
       which the broker or sales agent owns more than 10%, or a trust for which the broker or sales
       agent acts as a trustee or of which the broker or sales agent or the broker or sales agent’s
       spouse, parent or child is a beneficiary, to notify the other party in writing before entering into
       a contract of sale. Disclose if applicable:
                                                                                                             .
    B. BROKERS’ FEES: All obligations of the parties for payment of brokers’ fees are contained in
       separate written agreements. Brokers’ fees are not set by law and are negotiable.
  9.CLOSING:
    A. The closing of the sale will be on or before                              , 20       , or within 7 days




                                           T
       after objections made under Paragraph 6D have been cured or waived, whichever date is later
       (Closing Date). If either party fails to close the sale by the Closing Date, the non-defaulting
       party may exercise the remedies contained in Paragraph 15.
    B. At closing:
                                        AF
       (1) Seller shall execute and deliver a general warranty deed conveying title to the Property to
           Buyer and showing no additional exceptions to those permitted in Paragraph 6 and furnish
           tax statements or certificates showing no delinquent taxes on the Property.
       (2) Buyer shall pay the Sales Price in good funds acceptable to the Escrow Agent.
       (3) Seller and Buyer shall execute and deliver any notices, statements, certificates, affidavits,
           releases, loan documents, transfer of any warranties, and other documents reasonably
           required for the closing of the sale and the issuance of the Title Policy.
       (4) There will be no liens, assessments, or security interests against the Property which will not
           be satisfied out of the sales proceeds unless securing payment of any loans assumed by
           Buyer and assumed loans will not be in default.
                          R
       (5) Private transfer fees (as defined by Chapter 5, Subchapter G of the Texas Property Code)
           will be the obligation of Seller unless provided otherwise in this contract. Transfer fees
           assessed by a property owners’ association are governed by the Addendum for Property
           Subject to Mandatory Membership in a Property Owners Association.
 10.POSSESSION:
                D

    A. BUYER’S POSSESSION: Seller shall deliver to Buyer possession of the Property: q upon closing and
       funding q according to a temporary residential lease form promulgated by TREC or other written
       lease required by the parties. Any possession by Buyer prior to closing or by Seller after closing
       which is not authorized by a written lease will establish a tenancy at sufferance relationship between
       the parties. Consult your insurance agent prior to change of ownership and possession
       because insurance coverage may be limited or terminated. The absence of a written lease
       or appropriate insurance coverage may expose the parties to economic loss.
    B. SMART DEVICES: “Smart Device” means a device that connects to the internet to enable
       remote use, monitoring, and management of: (i) the Property; (ii) items identified in any Non-
       Realty Items Addendum; or (iii) items in a fixture lease assigned to Buyer. At the time Seller
       delivers possession of the Property to Buyer, Seller shall:
       (1) deliver to Buyer written information containing all access codes, usernames, passwords, and
           applications Buyer will need to access, operate, manage, and control the Smart Devices;
           and
       (2) terminate and remove all access and connections to the improvements and accessories from
           any of Seller’s personal devices including but not limited to phones and computers.
 11.SPECIAL PROVISIONS: (This paragraph is intended to be used only for additional informational
    items. An informational item is a statement that completes a blank in a contract form, discloses
    factual information, or provides instructions. Real estate brokers and sales agents are prohibited
    from practicing law and shall not add to, delete, or modify any provision of this contract unless
    drafted by a party to this contract or a party's attorney.)
                                                                                                       .
 12.SETTLEMENT AND OTHER EXPENSES:
    A. The following expenses must be paid at or prior to closing:
       (1) Seller shall pay the following expenses [Expenses payable by Seller] (Seller's Expenses):
           (a) Releases of existing liens, including prepayment penalties and recording fees; release of

Initialed for identification by Buyer                 and Seller                            TREC NO. 23-19[18]
 Contract Concerning                                                            Page 6 of 10    11-04-2024
 [11-07-2022]                              (Address of Property)
                  Seller’s loan liability; tax statements or certificates; preparation of deed; one-half of
                  escrow fee; brokerage fees that Seller has agreed to pay; and other expenses payable
                  by Seller under this contract.
             (b) The following amount to be applied to brokerage fees that Buyer has agreed to pay:
                  q$               or q _____% of the Sales Price (check one box only).
             (c) [Seller shall also pay an] An amount not to exceed $                       to be applied
                  [in the following order: Buyer’s Expenses which Buyer is prohibited from paying by FHA,
                  VA, Texas Veterans Land Board or other governmental loan programs, and then] to
                  other Buyer’s Expenses [as allowed by the lender].
         (2) Buyer shall pay the following expenses [Expenses payable by Buyer] (Buyer's Expenses):
             Appraisal fees; loan application fees; origination charges; credit reports; preparation of loan
             documents; interest on the notes from date of disbursement to one month prior to
             dates of first monthly payments; recording fees; copies of easements and restrictions; loan
             title policy with endorsements required by lender; loan-related inspection fees; photos;
             amortization schedules; one-half of escrow fee; all prepaid items, including required
             premiums for flood and hazard insurance, reserve deposits for insurance, ad valorem taxes
             and special governmental assessments; final compliance inspection; courier fee; repair
             inspection; underwriting fee; wire transfer fee; expenses incident to any loan; Private
             Mortgage Insurance Premium (PMI), VA Loan Funding Fee, or FHA Mortgage Insurance
             Premium (MIP) as required by the lender; brokerage fees that Buyer has agreed to pay;
             and other expenses payable by Buyer under this contract.
      B. If any expense exceeds an amount expressly stated in this contract for such expense to be paid
         by a party, that party may terminate this contract unless the other party agrees to pay such
         excess. Buyer may not pay charges and fees expressly prohibited by FHA, VA, Texas Veterans
         Land Board or other governmental loan program regulations.
 13.PRORATIONS AND ROLLBACK TAXES:
      A. PRORATIONS: Taxes for the current year, interest, rents, and regular periodic maintenance
         fees, assessments, and dues (including prepaid items) will be prorated through the Closing
         Date. The tax proration may be calculated taking into consideration any change in exemptions




                                      T
         that will affect the current year's taxes. If taxes for the current year vary from the amount
         prorated at closing, the parties shall adjust the prorations when tax statements for the current
         year are available. If taxes are not paid at or prior to closing, Buyer will be obligated to pay
         taxes for the current year.
      B. ROLLBACK TAXES: If additional taxes, penalties, or interest (Assessments) are imposed
                                   AF
         because of Seller’s use or change in use of the Property prior to closing, the Assessments will
         be the obligation of Seller. Obligations imposed by this paragraph will survive closing.
 14.CASUALTY LOSS: If any part of the Property is damaged or destroyed by fire or other casualty
      after the Effective Date of this contract, Seller shall restore the Property to its previous condition
      as soon as reasonably possible, but in any event by the Closing Date. If Seller fails to do so
      due to factors beyond Seller’s control, Buyer may (a) terminate this contract and the earnest
      money will be refunded to Buyer (b) extend the time for performance up to 45 days and the
      Closing Date will be extended as necessary or (c) accept the Property in its damaged condition
      with an assignment of insurance proceeds, if permitted by Seller’s insurance carrier, and receive
      credit from Seller at closing in the amount of the deductible under the insurance policy. Seller’s
                         R
      obligations under this paragraph are independent of any other obligations of Seller under this
      contract.
 15.DEFAULT: If Buyer fails to comply with this contract, Buyer will be in default, and Seller may (a)
      enforce specific performance, seek such other relief as may be provided by law, or both, or (b)
      terminate this contract and receive the earnest money as liquidated damages, thereby releasing
                D

      both parties from this contract. If Seller fails to comply with this contract Seller will be in default
      and Buyer may (a) enforce specific performance, seek such other relief as may be provided by
      law, or both, or (b) terminate this contract and receive the earnest money, thereby releasing both
      parties from this contract.
 16.MEDIATION: It is the policy of the State of Texas to encourage resolution of disputes through
      alternative dispute resolution procedures such as mediation. Subject to applicable law, any
      dispute between Seller and Buyer related to this contract which is not resolved through informal
      discussion will be submitted to a mutually acceptable mediation service or provider. The parties to
      the mediation shall bear the mediation costs equally. This paragraph does not preclude a party
      from seeking equitable relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
 17.ATTORNEY'S FEES: A Buyer, Seller, Listing Broker, Other Broker, or Escrow Agent who prevails
      in any legal proceeding related to this contract is entitled to recover reasonable attorney’s fees
      and all costs of such proceeding.
 18.ESCROW:
      A. ESCROW: The Escrow Agent is not (i) a party to this contract and does not have liability for the
         performance or nonperformance of any party to this contract, (ii) liable for interest on the
         earnest money and (iii) liable for the loss of any earnest money caused by the failure of any
         financial institution in which the earnest money has been deposited unless the financial
         institution is acting as Escrow Agent. Escrow Agent may require any disbursement made in
         connection with this contract to be conditioned on Escrow Agent’s collection of good funds
         acceptable to Escrow Agent.
      B. EXPENSES: At closing, the earnest money must be applied first to any cash down payment,
         then to Buyer's Expenses and any excess refunded to Buyer. If no closing occurs, Escrow Agent
         may: (i) require a written release of liability of the Escrow Agent from all parties before
         releasing any earnest money; and (ii) require payment of unpaid expenses incurred on behalf
         of a party. Escrow Agent may deduct authorized expenses from the earnest money payable to a
         party. “Authorized expenses” means expenses incurred by Escrow Agent on behalf of the party
         entitled to the earnest money that were authorized by this contract or that party.
      C. DEMAND: Upon termination of this contract, either party or the Escrow Agent may send a
Initialed for identification by Buyer                  and Seller                          TREC NO. 23-19[18]
 Contract Concerning                                                               Page 7 of 10    11-04-2024
 [11-07-2022]                               (Address of Property)
       the demand from the other party within 15 days, Escrow Agent may disburse the earnest money
       to the party making demand reduced by the amount of unpaid expenses incurred on behalf of
       the party receiving the earnest money and Escrow Agent may pay the same to the creditors. If
       Escrow Agent complies with the provisions of this paragraph, each party hereby releases Escrow
       Agent from all adverse claims related to the disbursal of the earnest money.
    D. DAMAGES: Any party who wrongfully fails or refuses to sign a release acceptable to the Escrow
       Agent within 7 days of receipt of the request will be liable to the other party for (i) damages (ii)
       the earnest money; (iii) reasonable attorney's fees; and (iv) all costs of suit.
    E. NOTICES: Escrow Agent’s notices will be effective when sent in compliance with Paragraph 21.
       Notice of objection to the demand will be deemed effective upon receipt by Escrow Agent.
 19.REPRESENTATIONS: All covenants, representations and warranties in this contract survive
    closing. If any representation of Seller in this contract is untrue on the Closing Date, Seller will be
    in default. Unless expressly prohibited by written agreement, Seller may continue to show the
    Property and receive, negotiate and accept back up offers.
 20.FEDERAL [TAX] REQUIREMENTS: If Seller is a "foreign person,” as defined by Internal Revenue
    Code and its regulations, or if Seller fails to deliver an affidavit or a certificate of non-foreign status
    to Buyer that Seller is not a "foreign person,” then Buyer shall withhold from the sales proceeds an
    amount sufficient to comply with applicable tax law and deliver the same to the Internal Revenue
    Service together with appropriate tax forms. Internal Revenue Service regulations require filing
    written reports if currency in excess of specified amounts is received in the transaction.
 21.NOTICES: All notices from one party to the other must be in writing and are effective when mailed
    to, hand-delivered at, or transmitted by fax or electronic transmission as follows:

     To Buyer at:                                          To Seller at:




                                           T
                                        AF
      Phone:           (   )                                Phone:         (   )


      E-mail/Fax:                                           E-mail/Fax:
                           R
      E-mail/Fax:                                           E-mail/Fax:
      With a copy to Buyer’s agent at:                      With a copy to Seller’s agent at:
                D


 22. AGREEMENT OF PARTIES: This contract contains the entire agreement of the parties and
     cannot be changed except by their written agreement. Addenda which are a part of this contract
     are (check all applicable boxes):
     q   Third Party Financing Addendum                   q    Addendum for Coastal Area Property
     q   Seller Financing Addendum                             Environmental Assessment, Threatened or
                                                          q    Endangered Species and Wetlands
     q   Addendum for Property Subject to                      Addendum
         Mandatory Membership in a Property
         Owners Association                               q    Seller’s Temporary Residential Lease

     q   Buyer’s Temporary Residential Lease
                                                          q    Short Sale Addendum
                                                               Addendum for Property Located Seaward
     q   Loan Assumption Addendum                         q    of the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway
     q   Addendum for Sale of Other Property                   Addendum for Property in a Propane Gas
         by Buyer                                         q    System Service Area
     q   Addendum for Reservation of Oil, Gas                  Addendum containing Notice of Obligation
         and Other Minerals                               q
                                                               to Pay Improvement District Assessment
     q   Addendum for "Back-Up" Contract
                                                          q    Addendum for Section 1031 Exchange
     q   Addendum Concerning Right to
         Terminate Due to Lender’s Appraisal              q    Other (list):


Initialed for identification by Buyer                and Seller                             TREC NO. 23-19[18]
 Contract Concerning                                                                              Page 8 of 10         11-04-2024
 [11-07-2022]                                       (Address of Property)

 23. CONSULT AN ATTORNEY BEFORE SIGNING: TREC rules prohibit real estate brokers and sales
     agents from giving legal advice. READ THIS CONTRACT CAREFULLY.
     Buyer's                                                         Seller's
     Attorney is:                                                    Attorney is:




     Phone:         (     )                                           Phone:           (      )


     Fax:           (     )                                           Fax:             (      )


     E-mail:                                                          E-mail:




                                            T
    EXECUTED the         day of                                                            , 20          (Effective Date).
    (BROKER: FILL IN THE DATE OF FINAL ACCEPTANCE.)
                                         AF
    This contract is subject to Chapter 27 of the
    Texas Property Code. The provisions of that                     Buyer
                              R
    chapter may affect your right to recover
    damages arising from a construction defect. If
    you    have    a   complaint     concerning    a
    construction defect and that defect has not
    been corrected as may be required by law or                     Buyer
                D

    by contract, you must provide the notice
    required by Chapter 27 of the Texas Property
    Code to the contractor by certified mail, return
    receipt requested, not later than the 60th day
    before the date you file suit to recover
    damages in a court of law or initiate                           Seller
    arbitration. The notice must refer to Chapter
    27 of the Texas Property Code and must
    describe the construction defect. If requested
    by the contractor, you must provide the
    contractor an opportunity to inspect and cure                   Seller
    the defect as provided by Section 27.004 of
    the Texas Property Code.




                  The form of this contract has been approved by the Texas Real Estate Commission. TREC forms are intended for
                  use only by trained real estate license holders. No representation is made as to the legal validity or adequacy of
                  any provision in any specific transactions. It is not intended for complex transactions. Texas Real Estate Commis-
                  sion, P.O. Box 12188, Austin, TX 78711-2188, (512) 936-3000 (http://www.trec.texas.gov) TREC NO. 23-19[18].
                  This form replaces TREC NO. 23-18[17].


Initialed for identification by Buyer                         and Seller                                    TREC NO. 23-19[18]
 Contract Concerning                                                                               Page 9 of 10      11-04-2024
 [11-07-2022]                                      (Address of Property)




                                                  BROKER INFORMATION
                                              (Print name(s) only. Do not sign)



   Other Broker Firm                            License No.      Listing Broker Firm                                License No.


   represents    q Buyer only as Buyer’s agent                   represents    q Seller and Buyer as an intermediary
                 q Seller as Listing Broker’s subagent                         q Seller only as Seller’s agent

   Associate’s Name                             License No.      Listing Associate’s Name                           License No.


   Team Name                                                     Team Name


   Associate’s Email Address                         Phone       Listing Associate’s Email Address                       Phone


   Licensed Supervisor of Associate             License No.      Licensed Supervisor of Listing Associate           License No.




                                             T
   Other Broker's Address                            Phone       Listing Broker’s Office Address                         Phone


   City
                                          AF
                                      State              Zip     City                                       State           Zip


                                                                 Selling Associate’s Name                           License No.


                                                                 Team Name
                               R
                                                                 Selling Associate’s Email Address                       Phone


                                                                 Licensed Supervisor of Selling Associate           License No.
                  D

                                                                 Selling Associate’s Office Address


                                                                 City                                    State              Zip




    Disclosure: Pursuant to a previous, separate agreement [(such as a MLS offer of compensation or other
    agreement between brokers)], Listing Broker has agreed to pay Other Broker a fee (q $_______ or q
    _____% of the Sales Price [                         ]). This disclosure is for informational purposes and does
    not change the previous agreement between brokers to pay or share a commission.




Initialed for identification by Buyer                          and Seller                                   TREC NO. 23-19[18]
 Contract Concerning                                                                Page 10 of 10    11-04-2024
 [11-07-2022]                                    (Address of Property)



                                                 OPTION FEE RECEIPT

   Receipt of $                                 (Option Fee) in the form of __________________________________
   is acknowledged.


   Escrow Agent                                                                       Date

                                              EARNEST MONEY RECEIPT

   Receipt of $________________________ Earnest Money in the form of
   is acknowledged.

   Escrow Agent                                  Received by   Email Address                         Date/Time




   Address                                                                                              Phone



   City                                 State                            Zip                               Fax


                                                  CONTRACT RECEIPT




                                           T
   Receipt of the Contract is acknowledged.

   Escrow Agent
                                        AF       Received by   Email Address                             Date


   Address                                                                                              Phone


   City                                 State                            Zip                               Fax



                                   ADDITIONAL EARNEST MONEY RECEIPT
                          R
   Receipt of $_____________________ additional Earnest Money in the form of _________________________
   is acknowledged.
                  D

   Escrow Agent                                  Received by   Email Address                         Date/Time


   Address                                                                                              Phone


   City                                 State                            Zip                               Fax




Initialed for identification by Buyer                     and Seller                         TREC NO. 23-19[18]
